TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-13H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 I think he's got a future if the troops leave. I mean, I believe somebody will
try to kill him. Breaking Mississippi with me, Jen White. Starts next Monday to
Friday morning at 9.45 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at midday. In the
next hour, the Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, will set out new legislation in
the Commons aimed at stopping asylum seekers crossing the Channel in small
boats. The illegal migration bill is expected to include measures to remove
people arriving illegally and prevent them from claiming asylum or from
returning to the UK in future. Ms Braverman has acknowledged the bill pushes the
boundaries of international law. Kevin Saunders, who's a former Chief
Immigration Officer with the UK Border Force, says while many of the proposals
are workable, there's one major stumbling block. The problem is with all of
this, and I, like everybody else, want to know what the Home Secretary is going
to say about removals, where we are going to be removing to. Because at the
moment, we're very, very limited on where we can remove people to. So this is
the big issue. A man has gone on trial accused of the murder of Olivia Pratt-
Corbell, the nine-year-old girl shot dead in her home in Liverpool last August.
Manchester Crown Court was told that Thomas Cashman had been armed with two guns
when he chased his intended victim, Joseph Nee, into Olivia's home in what the
prosecution described as a ruthless pursuit. Olivia was shot in the chest.
Thomas Cashman denies murder and several other charges. A Conservative MP, James
Daly, has said he's disappointed by WhatsApp messages between the former Health
Secretary Matt Hancock and one of his aides which suggest they discussed
withholding funding from a disability centre if Mr Daly voted against the
government. The messages have been published by the Daily Telegraph. A
spokesperson for Mr Hancock said what the newspaper was accusing him of doing
never happened. Mr Daly, who represents Bury North, told BBC Radio Manchester
what he would have told Mr Hancock had the former Health Secretary sent similar
messages to him. I would have told him, put it bluntly, where to go, and
reported matters to a higher authority, if I could put it that way. Whichever
way we look at this, even if it's a private conversation, to think that somebody
would use potential funding that could help someone who's vulnerable in our
community, in terms of getting enough votes for the government, is just not
acceptable. The United Nations says the earthquake which struck Turkey in Syria
last month caused damage estimated at over $100 billion in Turkey alone. More
than 52,000 people are known to have died. An international conference to raise
money for victims of the quake will be held in Brussels next week. Ukraine's
armed forces say they have identified a Ukrainian soldier who's seen in video
footage being gunned down in an apparent extrajudicial killing by Russian
forces. They've accused Moscow of breaching international law by shooting dead
an unarmed prisoner. More details from Danny Eberhard. Graphic video footage of
the killing first appeared on social media. It shows a Ukrainian soldier
standing, apparently unarmed, in a shallow foxhole in a wood, smoking. Glory to
Ukraine, he says, to his off-camera captors. He's then shot down from close
range in a hail of automatic gunfire. President Zelensky called him a warrior
and a hero, promising to track down his killers. Ukraine's army has accused
Russia of a brazen breach of international law, promising just and legal
retribution. The United Nations is investigating evidence of summary killings of
prisoners of war on both sides. It's called on Russia and Ukraine to respect
their commitments under the Geneva Conventions. More than a million people are
expected to take part in strikes and protests in France today against pension
reforms. They're unhappy at government plans to raise the state pension age from
62 to 64. It's the sixth day of industrial action this year. European football's
governing body, UEFA, has announced a refund scheme for Liverpool fans who were
involved in chaotic scenes at last year's Champions League final in Paris.
French police used tear gas on supporters as they tried to enter the stadium,
before Liverpool fans were initially blamed for the disorder. An independent
report published last month found UEFA was primarily responsible for the
problems. BBC News. This is BBC Radio 4. Law in Action will be back for a new
series later this afternoon. Today asking how the law can help deliver justice
for Ukraine. I'm Joshua Rosenberg at 4 o'clock. But now it's time for Call You
and Yours with Winifred Robinson. Hello, welcome to the programme. Today we're
asking how is childcare working for you? Call us, ring 03700 100 444. Get in
touch if you're working parents or if you work in childcare or if you look after
children for someone else in your family. The cost of childcare is keeping women
out of the workplace. Childcare providers have written to the Prime Minister
asking him to make it a priority in the budget next week. How is childcare
working for you? Please call us, 03700 100 444. Jessica Hannan is on the line.
She is in Bath and Abbey Fisher is in Bristol. Hello to you both. Jessica, first
of all, tell us your situation. How many children do you have and how many hours
do you work? Hi, Winifred. I work about 32 hours a week and so does my partner.
We have an eight-year-old and a five-year-old. So that's pretty much full time?
Yes, we were full time but we've had to sort of reduce our hours recently.
Abbey, how about you? Yes, hello. So I work full-time hours but condensed into
four days. So I work 37 and a half hours but longer four days to try and keep
childcare costs down and my partner also works full time five days a week. And
how many children do you have? Yes, we've got a 21-month-old daughter and I'm
pregnant with our second. So, Jessica, tell me what childcare arrangements you
have and how much it costs you. Currently it's kind of just a mixture of help
from a grandma, both of us working from home and putting the TV on for them.
It's kind of a bit of a hash. We don't actually pay for anything at the moment.
We are babysitter but that's why we're actually reducing our hours because we
can't afford to actually pay for it. But we did live in Berlin where it was
free. So that's kind of very confusing for us because that has been our
experience. So we're just kind of readjusting having moved back to Britain.
Gosh, that must have been a blow. All of the childcare was free, was it, for
working parents in Berlin? Yes. So from one year old, if you can prove to your
local council that you work, so either a tax return for a self-employed person
or a contract from a boss, you get free childcare from one year old. I'm
guessing that must affect the whole culture of the workplace, doesn't it,
Jessica? Yes, it really did. I was in a senior management position in Berlin and
I just noticed even when we were hiring people how other people spoke about
parents. My German friends, they didn't think they had to change their careers
at all to have children. Personally, we saved a deposit for a small flat in
Bath, a two-bedroom flat, whilst we had babies in one year olds and two year
olds. So yes, it's completely different. Abi, tell me what you're doing for
childcare for your 21-month-old daughter. We do have to pay for childcare, so we
both have to work for different reasons. My partner is actually doing on-the-job
studying towards a qualification, so has to work full-time and I have the higher
income, so I have to work as well. So we pay for three days a week in nursery,
which costs us £800 a month. That's after tax relief, but we're not entitled to
any child benefits. Obviously, that's just for one child. We're expecting our
second. So for us, for those three days, it's about £10,000 a year. So very
challenging. We've also just announced a fee increase as well, which wasn't
unexpected, and certainly don't blame them for that. But it's very challenging.
It impacts what we can do in the future. For example, we're in a two-bed semi at
the moment. I should also mention I've got a nine-year-old stepson as well. So
we have to upsize, but we simply can't afford to do that along with the
childcare. So what we're having to do is we're actually going to have to take
some equity out of the house in order to pay towards the childcare for the next
couple of years, which obviously is not an ideal situation at all. Jessica, you
said that you're going to cut your hours down, you and your husband, that you
had a senior management job in Berlin. What is it that you're both doing now?
Well, I have my own perfume brand and I also write fashion copy for e-commerce
and he also writes fashion copy for e-commerce and lifestyle brands. I guess we
just blase in Germany. We just kept working, kept earning, and we just didn't
realize how privileged we were that either of us had to dip out of our careers
at all. I'm 38 and I just consistently worked. So has he. We doubled our income
during those early baby years. But you won't be able to do that here. You're not
going to be able to do that here. We're really struggling. So we've both gone
freelance recently to fit around the children and we're just literally looking
at our diaries. And from now until the end of August, there's 50 working days.
The school is shut for holidays and insect days. And how are we going to cover
that? And we haven't even got babies in nurseries. And school is also not a
childcare solution. They finish at 3 o'clock. So, yeah, we're kind of just a bit
confused. And also my sister has just had her baby's gone to nursery today.
She's gone back to work and she's paying £1,500 a month for their nursery. These
are just huge amounts, aren't they, from your tax income. Abi, is there anything
you'd like to say to Jessica? Well, I mean, I think that what's really the first
striking thing for me is around about the comparison from your experience in
Berlin. I mean, I've not had that comparison. But it just, for me, just really
highlighted one of my biggest issues around the unaffordable and unsustainable
childcare in the U.K., which is how it perpetuates the gender pay gap, the lack
of equal opportunity for women in the workforce. That's a really big issue for
me. I've got so many friends who can't, you know, have had to, who simply can't
justify going back to work, because it does affect mainly women. Slightly
different than where we have a slightly different set up in our household. We're
quite fortunate in that sense. But not being able to justify going back to work,
it all has so many knock-on effects to everything. And when you think about what
the rest of the world is doing, I think the U.K. is the second worst when it
comes to support, government support for childcare in the world. And I just
think that's outrageous. And I wonder why that is. There was an OECD report,
wasn't it, came out I think in November of last year, and it puts the U.K., the
cost to individual families, highest of 40 developed nations, at 29% of parental
income. Jessica, was there anything you wanted to say to Abby? I just think
she's doing a great job, her and her partner, and they sound very united. And
it's just really difficult. And keep going, because I agree, I think it becomes
a gender problem. And I think Germans, my experience with Germans, I mean,
nursery isn't free everywhere in Germany. Each area is different, but in Berlin,
yeah, people are just more equal. Women earn more, men sometimes earn less. They
share paternity, maternity leave. There's more mums and dads at the gates.
Bosses are less afraid of hiring women at a certain age because they have a
state-funded nursery system. And if it's possible for Germany, I think it's
possible for us. Jessica, Abby, thank you both so much. How is childcare working
out for you? Ring 03700 100 444. Natalie Clarkson is in Surrey and Ed Morris is
in Wiltshire. Ed, tell me, how many children do you have? Good afternoon,
Minister. Thanks for having me on. My wife and I have three. They're aged eight,
six and three. So we've put two of them through full-time nursery since they've
been about age of one. What do you both do for a living? Sorry, what do you both
do for a living? We're both data scientists and computer engineers. We have the
benefit of being relatively well paid. But I think even we consider it as a...
It's basically a second mortgage. That's what we have to consider it, really.
£1,400, £1,500 a month, that's equal to most people's mortgages. So childcare is
now a second mortgage, essentially. So people have to view whether they can
afford to put their children through nursery, as can we afford to buy a second
house? Because that's essentially... That's what we're talking about in terms of
the costs. Natalie, how about you? Tell us about your situation. So I have a boy
who's about to turn one. We put him into childcare two days a week. That's all
we can afford, really. We pay £550 per month for those two days. Such a lot of
money, isn't it, for such a little bit of childcare, two days. What do you do
for the rest of the week? So he goes... Sorry, my company do a four-day working
week, so I'm lucky in that sense. So Thursdays, he's with me, and then Tuesdays
and Wednesdays, I have to send him to mum's house for two nights, which isn't
ideal, and I'd love to be able to put him in a bit more, but I can't afford it.
It's more than my mortgage, just like he said. Ed, yes, how does your mum feel?
You say you have to send him to her because he has to stay overnight. Does she
live quite far away? Yeah, so she lives about an hour's drive, which isn't
ideal, so he does have to stay two nights. So that's two days that I'm not
seeing my son. And like I said, in an ideal world, I could put him in four days
a week, but unfortunately, it's just crazy expensive. And is your mum fitting
well enough to look after an 11-month-old baby for 48 hours without any help?
Yeah, no, she is. I have a 10-year-old brother as well, bless her. But no, she
does what she can. Obviously, it's not ideal for anyone. She'd love to just see
him on the weekend like most grandparents, but it's good help. So, Natalie, will
you be able to afford to have any more children? I was going to say that. So I
would love to have another baby, but it's just, we can't do it. Even if we were
to put the other baby in two days a week like we are now, that would be just
over a grand a month, both of them, and that's not something that we could
afford. And the crazy part is that my husband, he's on a lower wage than me, but
he would be better off not working than us paying that childcare, which is crazy
to me. You might wonder, Natalie, why is he working? I mean, often people carry
on working through their children, don't they, just to keep their foot on the
ladder of work for when the children go to school? Yeah, I don't think anyone
should be better off not working. I think that's the problem. I even have a
friend who just had her second baby. She's paying £2,200 a month to put her
babies in full-time, and it's just, it's obscene. Some people don't even earn
that in a month. And it really varies from where you live. Go on, Ed. I think
that's a really good point. I think, you know, I think also we're talking about
the necessity of childcare here from a point of view of just working. But I
think another really important degree that we sort of have to consider here is
the benefits to the child as well. I mean, we've talked, you know, we've just
gone through lockdown. We've just had children out of school. You know, we've
had the impact of the pandemic, and we've seen the social impacts on children,
in particular children of nursery age. You know, what we're seeing here is
another silent impact on young children not being able to go to nursery because
the parents can't afford to send them. And that must have knock-on effects in
terms of their social skills and their abilities once they go to school. Well,
Ed, we're going to come onto this, the way the system works, but there is 15
hours of free nursery care pretty much right across the UK, except in Northern
Ireland. That's not until they're three years old. Yes, not until they're three,
when they're three years old. So I suppose that they wouldn't miss out on it
completely, Ed. And some people do feel that very young children are better off
at home, you know, not in institutional settings. Yeah, but I mean, it does
raise that question as well, though, doesn't it? Why does it start at three? I
mean, there's been some excellent points already made, particularly on sort of
the gender pay disparity and, you know, women going to work, et cetera. You
know, it's true that some of the, you know, the parenting responsibility does
still fall largely to women and mothers. And I think, you know, we're trying as
a nation and as a world to sort of try and equalise that. But it strikes me that
these sorts of policies just don't help, because what are you supposed to do
until the age of three? You know, someone's got to take a career gap. Some
surveys... I also think it should be... Sorry to interrupt. No, go on. I'm the
one who used interrupts. You go ahead, Natalie. I just think it should be the
other way round. I think that you should get that help in the first three years,
you know, advance in your career and make the money, kind of plan ahead to be
able to afford childcare eventually. But we're coming back off maternity pay,
which is another subject in itself, which is terrible, and then we're going
straight into these childcare costs. So we haven't really got the help that we
need. I think it would make more sense to do the free childcare initially and
then pay these prices when they're three, because we've got three years to save
and, you know, advance in our careers and maybe get a higher wage or whatnot.
But there's just no help for new parents. I mean, it's probably worth being
explicit about what we mean about help as well. I mean, currently at the age of
three, it's 30 hours a week for 30 weeks. Yes, 38 weeks. Yeah, but anyway, that
is the maximum. All children qualify for 15 if both parents are working,
depending on what you earn. You might qualify for the 15. Yeah. Yes, exactly.
And you add that over 52 weeks of the year, which most nurseries do, and that
gives you basically 20 hours a week. Now, obviously, we all know that there
aren't many jobs that pay 20 hours, that are full time, that are classed as 20
hours a week. Ed, could I ask you, when you add it all up, have you ever added
it all up, what it will have cost you and your wife to work by the time your
children start school? Yes, we did that the other day, and it's basically a
very, very nice sports car, like an Aston Martin. It's upwards of 100,000
pounds. Oh, well, imagine if you had Aston Martin money, I suppose, which most
people haven't got, you probably haven't got. Yeah. It's ridiculous. I mean, it
shocked me, to be honest. It's absolutely ridiculous that that's required. You
know, it's just, yeah, the system is broken, I would say, in that regard. I
agree. You know, if the CBI is talking, and quite rightly talking about, you
know, the government's plans to grow the economy and to make our economy more
productive, and that we have, you know, issues with supply of labour, then it
strikes me that this, the policy as it stands at the moment for childcare is
basically working exactly in opposition to the government's desire to do that.
And it seems to me that any money that you would invest in childcare would
probably be paid back in terms of impact on the economy, positive impact on the
economy, due to the contributions of the people that are allowed to go back into
the workplace. So it doesn't appear to me to be even money lost. You know, it's
an investment for the future of the country. How is childcare working out for
you? That is our question on Call You and Yours today. Here's the number to
ring, 03700 100 444. Natalie, just before I let you go, I just want to bring in
Anna Wardley, who is in Gosport, because you said, Natalie, that nobody should
use all their income going back to work. And I think that's the situation you're
in, is it, Anna, or your husband? Yes, I have been, yes. So I'm a solo parent. I
have full financial responsibility for my daughter. My daughter's two years old.
And I calculated in December, when I actually had the courage to work it out,
that 110%, basically my childcare, cost 110% of my net income. So you're going
into death then to pay for childcare, yeah? Yeah, effectively, effectively,
yeah. And I'm, you know, I earn above the national average salary, and I've only
got one child. And I'm in the lucky position that I've got a very good credit
history. So, you know, I'm able to borrow on 0% credit cards, but not everybody
is in that position. And the fact I'm having to do that just feels completely
wrong, to be honest. So that's 110% of your salary, and then plus your rent,
plus bills, food. Yeah, exactly. It's just insane. Yeah, and, you know, when I
hear energy providers saying, you know, if you're spending 10% of your net
income on fuel, you're considered to be in fuel poverty. And I think to myself,
where does that leave me if, you know, 110% of my income is going on just one
outgoing? That's before any other costs, you know. And like I say, there's no
other wage earner. So, you know, I think a lot of these conversations around
childcare, there's a kind of assumption that there are two salaries coming in.
And I know at the moment, lots of the conversations are around what proportion
of the woman's income is being spent on childcare, and whether that makes sense
for her to work or not. Whereas actually for a lot of people, it's a household
income, which is two combined salaries, whereas we don't have that, you know,
for myself and my daughter. It's my income and my income alone. And I'm not
eligible for benefits. As I say, I earn above the national average salary. And
so, yeah, to say it's broken, I think would be an absolute understatement. Anna,
Natalie, Ed, thanks all. How is Childco working for you? Give us a call 03700
100 444. If you'd rather message us, you can text 84844. You can also tweet us,
hashtag you and yours. You can email us, youandyours at bbc.co.uk. Now, as we
were saying, there is some free childcare available. Now, here are the rules
boiled down as far as we could boil them down. In England, children are entitled
to 15 hours a week of funded nursery care for 38 weeks of the year when they are
three years old. Parents can claim an additional 15 hours for three-year-olds if
they're both working and depending on how much they earn. In Scotland, all
children get 30 hours a week from three years old in term time. In Wales,
children aged three get the funded 30 hours of childcare but for 48 weeks of the
year. In Northern Ireland, all three- and four-year-olds are entitled to only 12
1⁄2 hours a week of preschool education, and that is during term time. Now,
there's also a government payment you can claim if you're working to put towards
your childcare costs. That's over and above those funded hours. It's up to
£2,000 a year. Now, that's right across the UK. It depends on what you earn.
There's a floor and a ceiling on your earnings with that. Working parents on
universal credit may also be eligible for help with up to 85% of their childcare
costs. So, those are the rules boiled down as far as we could. They're certainly
not simple, are they? Purnima Tanuku is the chief executive of the National Day
Nurseries Association. So, she speaks for the people who own and run day
nurseries. Purnima, you've signed an open letter calling on Michi Sunak to
prioritise childcare reform in the spring budget. The system we have isn't
simple, is it? Absolutely not. Good afternoon, my friend. Good afternoon. I
think, you know, the parents who have, you know, so articulately explained the
challenges that they're facing, and sadly, there are many more of those, you
know, who are struggling to pay for childcare. But I think this is one of the
reasons why we partnered with Plum to deliver this letter to Number 10
yesterday, because, you know, two out of three parents are delaying having a
child or won't have another child due to higher childcare costs. And I think,
again, Natalie explained about, you know, the childcare being the second highest
cost after mortgage. So, that is absolutely not the situation that we would like
to see. But most importantly, I think Natalie also explained about when she was
in Germany, the cost of what she was paying for childcare, more or less nothing.
But the OECD figures already show that in Germany, they invest five times more
than in UK in terms of early education. So, that's the big difference that we
have at the moment. And that's why we're asking the government to really
seriously look at the chronic underfunding and really highlight, because
childcare and early education should be in level playing field and in par with
the kind of mainstream education. So, because, you know, education doesn't start
when the child goes to a school. Education starts much earlier than that. And
that's where nurseries and early years providers play a really key role in the
child development and, of course, you know, enhancing their life chances in the
future. Families in the UK are spending on average 29% of their wages on
childcare when they are both working. And that is the most in the developed
world according to the OECD. That's the organisation of 40 wealthy nations that
put out a report last winter. I mean, some of the emails that are coming in to
you and yours at bbc.co.uk, they are really heartbreaking. This one from Lucy,
our childcare costs are the same as the mortgage. It means we can't save for
anything. And we have very little left over for doing anything nice. So we use
the tax-free childcare scheme. That's the one I mentioned. It's still a struggle
for us. Our mortgage is increased now by £160 every month. The nursery fees have
also gone up. We now need to be even more careful. Having another child is out
of the question for us. We simply couldn't afford that. And this one from a
grandmother. My daughter is a nurse in a GP practice working only two days a
week, Monday and Friday. She relies on me to look after the children. She'd like
to work more days, but I can't manage anymore because I am 17 waiting for a hip
replacement. She says my grandchildren are three, seven and 14, and the 14-year-
old has Down syndrome and goes to special school. The special school has no
breakfast club or after-school club. And no childminder or nursery will take
him. The only option is for a family member to look after him before and after
school. I mean, you must be seeing, Puneema, the kind of human cost of this for
parents and families every single day. Absolutely, absolutely. But equally, I
think the biggest problem, why this is happening and why this has happened over
the years, is that government, when they first introduced the so-called free
hours, did not really cost out what is going to cost to deliver that child care.
And I think over the years, successive governments never actually kept up with
inflation costs and any other cost increases. So year on year, what we've seen
is costs going up for providers. For example, from April onwards, the living
wage and minimum wage rates are going to increase by 10%. And wages are majority
party, more than 70% of any nursery's operating costs. And of course, if you can
just look at from 2017, living wage and national wage alone increased between 35
to 46%. But at the same time, during that time, the funding rates only increased
13%. So we're getting an average of about £4.50 for providers to deliver that
high quality care. So what they're having to do is actually subsidise that with
the younger children who are full fee paying children. So what you are seeing is
for younger children, the fees are going up because that's the only way they can
balance their books. And of course, the other biggest issue is they've seen,
like all of us as householders and businesses, 300 to 600% increase in energy
bills. And of course, inflation is running at 10%. So we've seen a number of
nurseries closing. Even Ofsted figures actually that were published show that in
2021, 300 nurseries closed, 2019, 500. But overall, over 5,000 childcare
providers, which includes childminders, have actually closed down. So this is
really quite a serious situation. And this is why the government need to take
this very seriously. Because any nursery or a childcare provider closing in a
community impacts on parents, families and impacts on the local economy. And
that doesn't make any sense at all. Puneema, let me just interrupt you because I
want to bring in Caitlin Dalgleish in London because she has seen her nursery
fees go up by quite a lot. Tell us what's happening to you, Caitlin. Oh, hi,
Winifred. Thanks for having me on. You're very welcome. Essentially, the last
hike in fees have gone up to by £120 a month. I'll just add there that I'm also
expecting my second child in June. And that, obviously, when I fell pregnant,
the rise in electricity, etc., was also something that not necessarily had
happened yet. So, yeah, it's quite a big hike. I know that I'm going to be in
receipt for 30 hours after Easter holidays. But even then, my partner and –
Sorry, your first child is reaching three. Yeah, sorry, go on. Yeah, sorry, I
should have explained that. But essentially, I've had to sort of calculate the
next 12 months. And, you know, I'm going to have to keep my son out of nursery,
potentially, at kind of quite big peak times, like the summer holidays, whilst
I've got this little one. On top of that, he won't go to school till next
September. So, juggling two childcare costs next year has really made me think
about my hours when I go back to work, you know, what can I do? Do I have to do
more condensed hours? What do you do for a living, Caitlin? I mean, can you
alter your hours? There probably is a chance. I work for a university. So, I
know I'm quite privileged in a lot of ways. However, it would be meaning
potentially starting at 8 o'clock in the morning and working through till 5.30.
And obviously, you've got a caterer, you know, who's going to be looking after
my son and my other child at that point as well. Did you hear what Puneema
Tanuka was saying, that because the nurseries are not paid enough by the
government for the subsidised places, the parents who are putting younger
children in, like you, end up picking up the tab for that? Yeah, I completely
agree. And I think in my email over to the radio station, I also mentioned the
London living wage increase. And I mentioned that also they haven't really
factored in that, you know, that to nursery staff, which they 100% deserve, by
the way, they're fantastic. It doesn't really align with a general or average
salary that someone might earn. I'm on quite a modest income. So, it doesn't
really, like, support me. So, I think someone mentioned about the line of
inflation, you know, so my salary doesn't go up that much. And so, therefore,
you know, the cost of everything else makes it very hard for me to calculate,
yeah, what I can and cannot do for the future. Caitlin, thank you. Thanks so
much. Absolutely. I agree with, you know, what's been said already. But I think
there is another layer of challenge here, which I think, you know, parents may
not be aware of. We have been conducting research with the local authorities for
the past four years. And in terms of the budgets, because the earliest funding
sits in the school's budget. And, of course, the school's budget had an increase
in the budget last time of £2.6 billion increase in school's budget. Whereas the
earliest funding increase is absolutely minimal compared to that. But what's
happening is when we've done a Freedom of Information request to all 150 or
local authorities in England, and we got tremendous response, we got 90%
response. What's happening is there are huge underspends in the earliest
budgets. What I mean by that is last year alone, for example, there was £55
million of funding that was supposed to be passed on to earliest providers for
early education has not been spent. Where did that money go? That money has been
spent in other areas of the school's budgets, in additional needs and in other
areas. So when the government says that we have invested, you know, £3 billion
into early education or £4 billion into early education, all was since 2018,
£118 million of that money has not been actually spent on early education and
childcare. And on top of that, HMRC data has revealed tax free childcare is, of
course, a huge benefit for both working parents to be able to get that support.
Since it started in 2017, there is £2.4 billion of underspends. So what we're
saying to the government is, hang on a minute, you know, you're saying that this
is how much you're investing, but there are underspends in all these areas. Why
can't you bring those underspends into the budgets? Because they are actually
allocated for early education and childcare. Parents are totally entitled to be
able to access that. And that's a number one priority, what the government
should be doing, looking at exactly where the investment is going and how that's
been, you know, supporting parents. Because parents are really finding it
difficult to understand what they're entitled to. We've got about three or four
different areas. Sure. Thanks so, so much. I'll just stop you because the
callers are building up now. That was Purnima Tanuku, the chief executive of the
National Day Nurseries Association. I may come back to you, Purnima. How is
childcare working out for you? That's our question today. Here's the number to
call 03700 100 444. Paul Burgess is a Newton Abbot in Devon. Paul, I know you
have rung because you feel that no one is speaking for the care sector. We've
just had Purnima, I think, give that a good shot. What was it that you wanted to
say? Well, this seems to be this thing that everybody thinks childcare providers
are rolling in money. I mean, if you look at my wife and I, we're childminders.
We've been doing it roughly 20 years. The go in rate round our neck of the woods
is sort of 440, 450 an hour. We're only allowed three children by law. So that
means we're earning about 13 pounds per hour. We don't have to take off all our
costs like insurance, snacks, toys, heating. I mean, our heating has gone up
from something like 10 pounds a day to 30 pounds per day. So when you take all
that off, plus your business rates, you're actually probably not even earning
the minimum wage. And, you know, it is frustrating because there needs to be
more money in the sector. Also, I think, you know, maybe a little bit
controversially is parents shouldn't expect everything for free. They don't get
everything for free, though, do they, Paul? It's far from the situation we have.
They're not getting everything free. I'm sorry, I just said that that's far from
the situation we have, though, Paul. Yeah, yeah, I know. I know. But, you know,
you look at the 30 hours, you can extend that over the whole year. The lady who
was previously on said there was peaks and troughs in her payment demand. So you
can actually split the 30 hours over the whole year rather than just the school
hours. Yes, to 20 hours a week. Yeah, sure. Yeah. But the point I wanted to make
is that, you know, if we look at the 30 hours, round our neck of the woods, we
get paid about £4.20 to an hour by the government, by the county council. And I
would challenge any parent to say, would you work for £4.20 an hour? I don't
think anybody would. So this seems to be a misnomer that childcare providers are
rolling in money when it's actually getting to the stage now where people are
thinking, do you know what, it's just not worth it anymore. You know, the
children are absolutely beautiful. The parents are fantastic. But there comes a
point where we simply cannot afford to continue. And I think the answer is, you
know, the government needs to throw in more money. You know, there's money
around. It just needs to be spent better. Maybe we should be having a minimum
amount of money that childcare providers are paid for by the government. I think
as well, parents, there's a whole range of types of benefits out there that
parents can gain, but they're not easy to get access to. I think the whole
system is just completely broken. You know, and maybe what the government could
be looking at is, say, some form of tax incentive, because then that's quite
easy to apply and the cost of that is relatively low to administer. But my point
is, you know, if you're in a poor economy like Devon, we're not rich like other
parts of the UK. The situation is getting desperate, both for parents and also
childcare providers, and we're just going to lose more and more and more
capacity. And what somebody needs to do is to sit down and say, right, the most
precious years and the years where children can develop the most is in the early
years. And if we look in when they transgressed reception, if people aren't
working to develop the children in those early years, then the teachers are
going to have a harder and harder job. When the children transfer up to
reception and beyond. Paul, thanks so much for getting in touch. Thank you.
Alice is in Norfolk. Alice, tell us, how many children do you have? Hello,
Alice. Hi. Hello. Hi. Thanks for having me on. I have four children. I have a
nine-year-old and I've got seven-year-old twins. And I have a three-year-old as
well. She was three last month and she will qualify for her funded 30 hours
after the Easter holidays. I was interested to hear what Paul had to say because
I live in a rural area as well where childcare options are not necessarily.
There's not so much choice. You kind of have to take what's available rather
than than what you would choose, perhaps. I've worked through all my children's
early years. I'm a teacher, but there's no way that my salary would have covered
it. I feel really sad about the fact that it is becoming clearer to me that to
have more than one child and continue my career is pretty impossible. So that's
the choice you've taken. That's what I feel. Did you know at the time that if
you had a bigger family, you wouldn't be able to do so much work wise? No, no,
no. I hadn't realised that. I mean, when my oldest son, when I went back to work
with my oldest son, I went back full time and then I went to four days. But what
I subsequently realised now is that the main factor that enabled me to do that
was my mum. And my mum was there to do the wraparound care around the childcare.
We did always pay for childcare, but she was always available in an emergency.
And since we've had our twins, that became less of an option, which was
understandable. There was a lot of children and she's older. She's in her 70s
now. But in the last couple of years, she has been completely unable to support
us with childcare because she's quite unwell now herself. And that factor, aside
from everything else, I mean, for three years I was working part time and all of
my salary was covered by childcare costs, all of it. And we had to remortgage in
order to release funds to afford it, just to afford life generally. But now with
everything increasing in cost and things, I mean, I feel like as a household,
we're at a bit of a financial breaking point. But there will be a point where
there's some help coming through after Easter, which will be useful. But it
doesn't take into account the fact that... Is that your youngest being three?
I'm sorry, the help coming through after Easter? Yeah. Sorry. Yeah. OK. Yeah.
Yeah. So that will help. But it doesn't take into account that I can't envisage
working full time anymore, ever. And I'm a teacher, so I'm not worried about...
we don't have to worry so much about the school holiday. I don't know how
families manage that. And we're not on huge salaries as a couple between us, but
we're not on the basic minimum either. But it's just really hard. And our
childcare costs, when we had the twins, we had three under three for a long
time, that blew our mortgage out the water. I mean, it was just without having
extra funds and savings and things that we just threw at it, we would not
have... we wouldn't have coped. Alice, can I ask you, did you make a choice
between your career and your husband's career? Because there was some research I
read that suggested that couples know that there can't be two high-powered jobs
in a marriage or a partnership and children as well. So they make a choice and
usually it's the woman who goes part time. We kind of did, although
circumstances... our twins were born really premature and we were in hospital
for a long time with them. And then they were... one twin was very unwell. So
there were other things that happened and I just felt like I couldn't... there
was a lot of anxiety about leaving them. I just didn't want to be away for that
first year. So I think we probably would have made the decisions the way they've
come out. And my husband's been amazing. He's incredibly supportive and he's
stepped up in his career. But previous to us having children, I was the main
earner and now it's definitely not the case. But I think without having had the
experience of the premature twins, perhaps I would have made different choices.
But I'm happy with the way we've done that. But I don't think we could have...
you wouldn't plan for that, if that makes sense. It does, Alice. Thanks so much.
It's now almost a quarter to one. You're listening to Call You In Yours. It's
our weekly phone-in here on BBC Radio 4. I'm Winifred Robinson. Our question
today, how is childcare working out for you? Our number 03700 100444. Well, we
have labour shortages in the UK and currently a low level of economic growth.
The business organisation, the CBI, has said the childcare provision in the UK
is at crisis point. One of our earlier callers, Ed, mentioned that the CBI had
said that. The CBI says that the problem with childcare is weakening the economy
of the UK and that businesses are losing out on valuable talent. Well, the think
tank, the Centre for Progressive Policy, did some research just looking at the
economic costs of our childcare system. Ben Franklin is their director of policy
and research. Ben, I know you surveyed two and a half thousand women with at
least one child under ten. Run us through briefly, if you would, just your main
findings. Yeah, absolutely. So our findings were very stark. So we looked at, in
particular, labour market impact on women and their working lives. And we found
that around 27 percent of mums in the UK would like to work more hours if they
had access to childcare. And that's about one and a half million people. And if
those hours were then realised, it would have generated between 27 billion and
38 billion pounds in extra GDP per annum. So that's approximately one percent of
GDP, which is incredibly stark. But we also looked at other impacts on the
working lives of mums. And we found half a million were prevented from entering
paid employment. Around half a million also had to quit their jobs. And there
were impacts on skills and training. Perhaps one of the starkest findings of all
is that almost a million mums said they had been prevented from taking a job
that would have offered a higher salary. That's if you extrapolate from your two
and a half thousand, the percentages of the whole population, you would get to a
million. Exactly right. So it's a representative survey of two and a half
thousand mums. But you can then extrapolate that onto the UK population at
large. It's been reported that the Chancellor wanted to put additional help with
childcare into the spring budget, but can't do that because of the costs. Now,
we'll have to wait until Wednesday to see what he has decided. Those are just
newspaper reports. But if you could do just one thing, what would it be? Well, I
think the Women's Budget Group have said it well at this particular point in
time, is let's fund the current entitlement properly. And Purnima earlier was
talking about this as well, because currently providers are facing a loss and
more nurseries and childminders will go under unless that's funded. So first,
you've got to shore up the system. But second, you've got to have a long term
plan to bring in a universal childcare offer over the next three, four, five
years. It's not just enough to shore up the system. You have to support zero to
two, mums with zero to two year olds. You have to try and support more childcare
into the holidays as well. And that's something the mums in our survey told us
that they particularly want. And also wraparound care at school and primary
school age as well is really, really important. So you've got to have that long
term plan, shore up the system at first, but then have a long term plan for
universal childcare second. Ben Franklin, Director of Policy and Research at the
Centre for Progressive Policy. Thank you. We've got a lot of callers waiting
now, so I'll go straight back to the lines. We've got Amy Weston in Liverpool,
Mandy Abbott in Ipswich and Ruth Clements in Winchester. Amy, if I could start
with you, tell me how childcare is working for you. Initially, it was not the
best. So I had my daughter when I was 34 years old. She was born with two
complex medical conditions, including kidney failure. We were in the Children's
Eberlein Hospital for around seven months. And after that seven months, I
realised I couldn't continue to pay my mortgage. My initial plan was to have an
in-house nanny come and live with us. I'd keep my career because I had a great
job. She would live in the house with us, help with childcare. But then with my
daughter being born so poorly, none of that went to plan. And I then had to sell
my home when she was around one and a half years old. Are you a lone parent,
Amy? Is it just you? I am. Yeah, just myself. The monies I made from the sale of
my home, I had to use to pay for childcare myself of people to come into the
home who were medically trained to help me with my daughter. I then realised
that that wasn't going to be possible because the money was running out so
quickly. And it was quite a large sum of money, but because I was then having to
pay rent privately, which was twice as much as what my mortgage was, I wasn't
working the same amount of hours. I wasn't earning the same amount of money.
Sounds like it's been catastrophic for you, Amy, financially. Yeah, I've lost my
home. I had to declare myself bankrupt. Gosh. She's now nine years old. Well,
I'm currently at Old High Children's Hospital at the moment because she was sick
last night. So we've been admitted for a couple of days. I'm so sorry. I mean,
she's massively improved over the years because the medical advances have been
fantastic at the hospitals that we have been able to access. Amy, thank you. I'm
going to stop you. Long term, it affects people because you lose your home and
you lose your job and then you're stuck in a system and there's no way out of
it. Thanks so much for getting in touch. Mandy, tell us what you wanted to say.
Well, I just wanted to make the point that nobody seems to be talking about the
children here. And we're talking about everybody needing the government to pay
for their childcare. And there's already a crisis in childcare because they
can't get enough people to work in it. Don't any parents think that it would be
better for their child if in those early years they themselves looked after the
child? Twenty nine percent, which is the figure that you've given. Surely it's
an economy that some people could make and spend some time, just those few
precious early years, looking after your own child. I suppose the thing is,
Mandy, that people worry. I mean, a lot of women do that, don't they? Tends to
be women who do it, obviously. But they worry they won't get back into the
workplace, certainly not at the level that they left it. And also if they have
big mortgages, sometimes it takes two mortgages in a partnership just to have a
roof over your head. Well, everybody's situation is slightly different, and I
can see that for some people childcare is the only option. But I've had two
children myself who I cared for before I went back to work, and also five
grandchildren who I cared for part time so that my daughters could work half
time. And I looked after them half time. Now, those years are so precious, and
although when you're in it, they seem like they're never ending, they're very
quickly over. Yes. And I think it's a point of priorities. People like to live
in lovely houses and good thing too and have lots of money to spend. But
sometimes spending time with your child is most valuable because those years
will never come back to you. Mandy, thank you. Thanks for coming on and saying
that. I'm sure you're speaking for a lot of people who are listening would have
wanted to make that point. Ruth Clements is in Winchester. Ruth, tell me about
your situation. Hi. Well, I thought it was very interesting what Mandy was
saying. So we've got a nearly four year old and then two year old twins. And we
chose for me to take a career break, which was possible from my work for five
years, so that I could look after our children when they were young. I agree
with Mandy. It's really important. It was really important to me. I used to be a
teacher. Now, I don't necessarily want to go and look after other people's
children when I could look after my own. But my partner is also a teacher, and
his wage does not bring in enough for us to pay the rent and the bills and food.
So there's a big problem that we can't afford child care because we have twins.
I would need to earn an enormous amount to pay for both of their child care. But
also we can't afford to live without my wage. So actually, there's a big economy
that the grandparents are plugging a huge gap. So my parents look after our
children regularly. We've moved nearer to them. We're really grateful for them.
But that's the only way that I can then work freelance in order to bring in
enough money for our family to survive. So you're working reluctantly, Ruth,
because you have to to meet your outgoings, to keep a roof over your head? In
some ways, so I have done. I've done jobs that I didn't enjoy as much. I now do
a job that I really do enjoy, but it is very difficult to find the time. So when
there's a lot on, I have to take that work because it's freelance. I don't know
when there'll be more. So I will work every evening. And then that's the impact
on our family life, especially when children are little and I'm not getting much
sleep. And I need to, you know, I need to maximize that as well. So it's not I
do work a bit reluctantly, but I do really love what I do. But I'm very grateful
that I get to be at home with our children. And I think that there needs to be
an opportunity for that to happen as well. When parents really want to do that,
to be able to pause their careers and say, OK, I'm going to put that on hold.
But my career break is only five years and obviously I will need to go back
before the twins go to school. Ruth, thank you so much. Let's just fit in Kate
Godfrey then before we go. She is in Nottingham. She's been on the line for a
long time. Kate, tell us what you wanted to say. Similar, really. So we're
another family in the position where we had our child. Perhaps the one
perspective that you haven't had represented so far is older parents. I met my
husband when I was nearly 40 and he was nearly 50. We had a baby in a hospital
that was then is now under public inquiry for stunts and maternity care. Both
our son and I were very ill. We haven't had that sort of shock. We really didn't
like the idea that our son might be left on his own if things went badly wrong.
So we we tried for a sibling and we probably had twins. If they're in nursery
care, our bills could be 65, 70 thousand pounds a year. When our son did qualify
for his entitlement, one of the first things his school said to us is that they
think he should be under referral for ongoing support, which relates back to his
birth trauma. He absolutely needs the stability of the nursery where he is. We I
have to work 16 hours a week for our son to be entitled to that 30 hours, which
is people said is very minimal. You know, the perspective of your caller, he
said it would be nice if if you could stay at home. Yeah, it would be absolutely
lovely. But that is not how the system is set up. And one of the really strong
themes that you've had throughout this hour has been that having children can be
financially catastrophic. You throw everything, your savings, all of the
resources that you've built up. You have to put it into child care to get
through that first five years. There are quite a lot of parents out there who
who won't be able to rebuild. You know, we're looking at we're thinking by the
time our children are at university, my husband would be willing to what he
would have thought would be retirement age. It there is a sense of privilege
every day with having kids. You know, it's such a it's such a calling. It's such
joy. It's a delight. But there is also a sense that because of that, there's a
kind of national monumental gaslighting that happens, which is to say, well,
then you just have to live with the guilt of wondering how you're going to feed
your children, of wondering how you can care for them, of looking at the clock
every day. And thinking, how do we make it work today? Of being crossed with
your children because they're ill. We are millions of us are going through it as
families. And the thing that I've heard on this program that actually made me a
little bit annoyed was when you reported the coverage of Jeremy Hunt as he would
have liked to do something, but it's just too expensive. Well, I'm sorry, but
that's just not good enough, because what we are hearing here is that families
and children are really in crisis. Some of your calls have been deeply, deeply
affected. I'm going to stop you only because we've run out of time. That is all
the time we have today. But thank you, everyone who got in touch. On the program
tomorrow, Eurovision tickets went on sale at midday today. So please contact us
now. Tell us your experience of trying to buy one. So email us if you would,
youandyours at bbc.co.uk, because on the program tomorrow, we'll be revealing
our investigation into why the chances of you getting a Eurovision ticket or a
ticket for any other big concert you want to go to at face value are vanishingly
small. I'll be back tomorrow, same time, just after the news at midday. Call You
and Yours was produced by Tara Holmes. The studio managers were Amy Brennan and
Sue Stone Street. Now, time for a look at the weather. Here's Helen Willis.
Caroline, thank you very much indeed. Destructive snow is what we're forecasting
for the next few days. And by that, I mean delays and cancellations with
transports, heavy snow blocking roads and stranding vehicles and strong winds to
add to it, along with ice affecting power lines. Yeah, we have got some rather
nasty weather on the way. So for the rest of the day today, there will be plenty
of sunshine across England and Wales. We do have rather more cloud, though, in
the south still remnants of the overnight light dusting of snow for some just
making it quite cloudy. It's cold at four or five for Northern Ireland as well.
We have got one or two wintry showers pestering the north coast, but essentially
we've got a lot of dry and fine weather as well. But those snow showers will
start to pile up only three or four here. And for Scotland, too, lots of heavy
snow showers have already been causing disruption through the day. So road
closures, school closures and those heavy snow showers will continue,
particularly for the north of Scotland as we go through the rest of the
afternoon. So highs only a few degrees above freezing at best. Now, tonight it
will be widely cold. We will keep a few snow showers for the north of Scotland,
running down the east coast into eastern parts of England, pushing into Northern
Ireland as well. But temperatures will widely fall below freezing, but as low as
minus 15 in the glens of Scotland and over the snowfields. That's the coldest
night of the year so far. And the other thing we'll watch for this evening and
overnight is a band of snow pushing in across southern areas. We could have a
light dusting to wake up to in southern parts of England, south Wales as we go
towards morning. So clearly cold, clearly some potential for disruptive snow and
some icy conditions first thing tomorrow. And tomorrow does look like another
bright and dry day for many inland areas. But we'll have those peppering of
showers still where we have them today and then the prospect later tomorrow of
more snow coming in across southern counties of England, southern Wales into the
south of East Anglia as well. As much as five to 10 centimetres of snow over the
higher ground, even at lower levels of dusting, which could of course cause some
problems through the rush hour. Caroline. Thanks, Helen. And you can get all of
our latest weather forecasts, including a local 10 day forecast on our website.
On BBC iPlayer, step right in. Perfect timing. The East End is ever changing.
What is this? Scooter? The order has entered the 1960s. Barely eight years late.
But the midwives of Nunatta's house are forever constant. You've a home here now
and purpose and people who love you. Call the midwife. We will be with you every
step of the way.