TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Listen now on BBC Sounds. BBC News at five o'clock. In the past few minutes,
it's been announced that Rishi Sunak will meet the President of the European
Commission Ursula von der Leyen tomorrow to discuss progress on a deal for trade
in Northern Ireland. This morning, the Deputy Prime Minister Dominic Raab hinted
there could be a more relaxed approach to checks on goods arriving from the
British mainland and that politicians in Belfast could be given new powers to
limit future interventions by the EU. The Irish Deputy Prime Minister Mihal
Martin told RTE he was optimistic about a fresh start. I think the issues that
have been raised by unionism in particular have been responded to from what I
can see. And obviously it's a matter for all parties to look at this agreement
when it's published. But in my view, there is an imperative in the interest of
the people of Northern Ireland to have democracy prevail and to have the
institutions of the Good Friday Agreement restored. And I believe a very genuine
effort has been made here to listen to the concerns around the protocol. Mr Raab
has promised to resign if an inquiry finds that he bullied civil servants. Eight
formal complaints have been made against him relating to periods when he was
Justice Secretary, Foreign Secretary and Brexit Secretary. He says he always
acted professionally. Around 60 people are now thought to have died when a boat
sank in rough seas off the coast of southern Italy. It's thought the wooden
boat, carrying people from Afghanistan, Pakistan, the Middle East and Somalia,
left Turkey three or four days ago. Regina Catherine Bournet is from the
humanitarian group, the migrant offshore aid station. I believe that this could
be a secondary effect of the earthquake in Turkey. And if we don't think about
this now, we will have many, many tragedies during this summer. A former
Environment Secretary George Eustace says the government can't do much about a
shortage of fresh fruit and vegetables in supermarkets. He told the BBC it might
last for three to four weeks and was caused by poor weather abroad. Numbers of
the rough collie breed of dog have fallen to their lowest level for 75 years,
according to the Kennel Club. The breed, which has a long marmalade and white
coat, was made famous by the fictional character Lassie. Last year, fewer than
500 puppies were born. Bill Vambert is from the Kennel Club. The collie became
immensely popular through the period of those films. And there was a TV series
as well about Lassie. But since then, we've seen a decline. And decline has
accelerated. Literally 10 years ago, the registrations at the Kennel Club, we
were reaching around about 1,000 a year. They've declined to less than 500 in
just a few years. So we're really quite worried. They're just falling out of
popularity and because people don't see them. In the past few minutes,
Scotland's hopes of a grand slam in rugby unions' Six Nations have been ended by
France in Paris. The home side won by 32 points to 21. BBC News. And now, final
on four. Jane Deith investigates claims of sexism, bullying and abuse in the
fire service and hears calls for radical reforms within the emergency service.
You have to live within five minutes of the station when you're a retained
firefighter. OK. That makes sense. So on the left-hand side, we're just coming
up to the fire station. Oh, what, here? Yeah. The really modern building. Yes,
it's a lovely station. It says we are recruiting. Yes. So this is where I lived
in this street here. You really were close, weren't you? Yeah. So I was just in
one of these houses up here. So I literally, the alert would go off and I would
just run. Just down there would take me about 10 seconds to get there. Donna
Wood was working in the NHS when she heard her local fire station in
Staffordshire was recruiting. She liked the sound of a career as a firefighter.
She's tall and strong with long blonde hair. She strikes me as a measured
person, quietly confident. You know, actually going to incidents and actually
being involved in that and knowing that you're making a difference. That was so
rewarding. To be there to be able to help the people involved and to give them
the reassurance that they needed at that time. Donna's invited me round for a
coffee. Her house is just a few minutes from the station. So this is us. OK.
Shall we go through here? Yeah. Come in. Thanks a lot. Have a seat. Oh, great.
Thank you. Thanks. When Donna was in her 30s and her daughter was at primary
school, she had time to take a breath and think seriously about becoming a
firefighter. It was something she'd always been interested in. She wanted to
save lives, but she also wanted to say thank you to Staffordshire Fire and
Rescue Service for a very personal reason. I've always been quite a physical
person anyway in terms of fitness and stuff. So I knew I could physically do the
job. But one of the main things really was I lost my mum in a car accident when
I was younger, when I was 18. And it was actually a staff's fire brigade that
went to that. Unfortunately, nothing could be done. But it was a driving force
for me to want to make an impact and be able to help in some way. So when I
finally got the opportunity to join, it felt like the right thing for me. Women
have been in the fire service since the 80s, but it's still overwhelmingly male.
Almost 8% of firefighters are female, desperate to become more diverse. The fire
service is on a drive to attract more women. For Donna, the job was a complete
change, but she liked her first taste of life on the station. Did you feel that
you'd found your home? You know, this was the place for you? Yeah, it was kind
of quite militarian in how they ran the drills and the training exercises and
stuff, which was something new to get used to. But I kind of liked that as well.
It instilled a bit of discipline. But yeah, it was good. Staffordshire Fire and
Rescue Service was very happy to have her. Donna became their poster girl. She
was the face of the modern fire service, in the brochures and on social media,
perfect for encouraging more women to join. I'd be smiling on the poster and,
you know, I remember being interviewed about life in the fire service and
obviously I was saying how good it was. Actually, at the time, I genuinely
wanted it to be true because I wanted to have a really good and long career in
the fire service. But actually the reality was completely different. Reality was
feeling lonely, ostracised, unsupported. Donna says no matter how hard she
tried, nothing was ever good enough. She was basically blanked. People would
come on station and they would ignore me or you'd go on incidents and be
ignored. You know, I would get on the truck and go to incidents and sometimes I
wouldn't even be spoken to. I could get back to the station and go home and not
one person would have spoken to me. There was, I remember, a basement fire in
Stafford that I went to. And I just remember just the thoughts going through my
head was I don't trust them. I don't trust them to have my back. Donna wasn't
about to give up. She was ambitious. She got on with the job and focused on
passing her assessments. But while colleagues were given encouragement, training
opportunities and mentors, Donna says it wasn't on offer for her. Rather, it
felt like they wanted to find ways to force her out. One time her boss pushed
her to do a fitness test, despite the fact she was waiting for a scan to look
into severe post pregnancy back pain. He said he wanted her to do the test all
the same. So it was almost setting me up to fail and also wanted me to make sure
that I did that in front of the rest of the watch. Donna didn't do the test. It
turned out she had three slipped discs. She passed the next test, but her first
drill back with the watch seemed designed to be as physically punishing as
possible. They were advised by occupational health to have a phased return to
practical sessions. And it was far from that. Yeah, it was a real beast in. It
was a two hour drill. Donna says she was asked to do a lot more heavy lifting
than normal. She had to get the ladder off the truck and pitch it against a wall
eight times and then do hose runs. She says usually a drill involves doing one
or the other, not all of them all in the same exercise. She completed everything
that was asked of her, but it still wasn't good enough for them. Because
obviously I was quite physically drained afterwards. They just made a point of
saying that I need to get in the gym more and that I'm not up to the standard.
Yes, I was tired at the end of it, but there wasn't anything that I couldn't do.
They couldn't say that I failed on anything. When a vacancy came up as a driver
on the engine, Donna asked to be trained up. She wasn't chosen. She later found
out a manager had ruled her out because she had a young son and he assumed she
wouldn't be able to do it because of her childcare responsibilities. He just
decided to make that assumption. So they put another driver through instead, who
incidentally has four children. How did you feel about that attitude? I think
that was the point then that I realised that a lot of it was to do with me being
female rather than, you know, me personally. They clearly got some real issues
with females. When Donna attended a culture workshop supposed to be all about
making the brigade more inclusive, she mentioned her situation. It went down
like a lead balloon back at base. She says things got even worse. Several
rumours were spread about her. She was told she wasn't welcome at another
station. One manager threatened to take her to the cleaners, warning her he'd
been there a long time and had a lot of friends in the service. She was
eventually diagnosed with PTSD. When she started having suicidal thoughts, she
realised she'd have to walk away from what she thought would be her dream job. I
was just losing myself. I was losing all my confidence. It was affecting my home
life. Me and my partner almost split up because of the impact it was having
here. It was affecting my relationship with my children. And I just thought that
it's just easier and it would be better for other people if it just wasn't here.
Then I won't have to deal with all the situation that I was going through. So
you felt there wasn't a hope? Yeah, everything seemed hopeless at that point.
And... Sorry, can we just stop? This way, I don't like talking. We asked
Staffordshire Fire and Rescue about Donna's experience. It said it takes every
complaint seriously and inappropriate behaviour is dealt with robustly, that
there's no place for harassment, bullying or discrimination and that it's always
looking to improve support for staff and make the service somewhere people enjoy
working. Doctors have to be strong physically and mentally to do the job they
do. These are resilient women we're talking about. But Donna's not the only one
who's told us they've been pushed to the brink by the drip, drip, drip of being
demeaned and harassed at other stations around the country. Some of their
stories we can't tell at all, in some cases for legal reasons, in others because
women have signed gagging clauses or they're worried they'll be sacked for
bringing the fire service into disrepute. But some women did want to share their
experiences. We've changed their names and we're using actors. Sarah was bullied
by a male firefighter who did everything he could to intimidate her and mess
with her head. He'd shout in my face, who are you to tell me anything? You're
not the boss of me. What can you teach me? He'd point and jab me in the chest.
He gets so close I could feel the spit on my face. He was just a nasty old-
fashioned person. It was just because I was a woman. I tried to avoid him and
keep out of his way but he started knocking into me with his shoulder in the
corridors. He made my life a misery. He started tampering with my kit. One day I
found it thrown across the engine house. I could never prove it was him but
things always happened when he'd been on duty. Looking through my gloves and my
water bottle in the bin. Another time I found my health and safety paperwork in
the shredder. It got to the point where I was forever looking through and
checking my fire kit thinking am I going to find nails in my boots? It affected
my mental health. One time I took an overdose. Another time. At the station I
looked at the training tower which is really high and I got it into my head that
I'd run up the tower and jump off. I just got to the tower and someone spotted
me on the stairs and said hi. It snapped me out of it and I ran away and decided
I couldn't do it. Another woman Tamara told us when she worked at Avon Fire and
Rescue Service her manager openly bullied her and the rest of the watch stood by
and did nothing. He started saying women will be the downfall of the fire
service. He would humiliate me, tell me to shut up and know my place. He'd say
you're effing useless. Then it became more sexually orientated. He would make
comments about how I looked. I'd go to the gym in my leggings and he'd say you
got your pussy huggers on again and he'd make comments about my bottom. My
colleagues were lovely but they didn't stand up for me. They'd text me later
that day and ask if I was okay but they wouldn't say anything in front of the
manager. The power structures of the watch, the fear of speaking up or
jeopardising their job prospects with the boss meant they stayed silent. I
raised a complaint but when they interviewed everyone who'd witnessed what he'd
done they said no comment but then nodded their heads. He was found guilty of
some of it but not the sexual stuff because nobody corroborated what I was
saying other than the head nodding. Someone told me at the time the fire service
is 20 years behind the police when it comes to culture. Given everything I know
now I think she's right. Tamara wasn't the only one to suffer in Avon. Kirsty
contacted us to tell her she was harassed by a watch manager who then tried to
sabotage her personal and work life. He told my partner I was sleeping with
another firefighter. He said he couldn't bear to see me happy with my partner so
wanted to destroy that. He was suspended because of a different complaint put in
by somebody else but he would ring around and tell crews not to help me on jobs.
He sent messages to me on his brigade phone and I'd email HR every time an
incident happened but they told me it's your word against his. You can't win. I
ended up having a breakdown on the fire court one day. I had to walk away. It's
sad because they're not all like it. I still to this day want my job back but
it's not going to happen. I trained for a long time to do that job and worked
hard to prove myself. It's not about money. It's about justice. This can't keep
happening all the time. Avon Fire and Rescue Service told us it was sorry for
what Tamara and Kirsty went through. It admitted there have been cases where
behaviour has gone unchallenged and said it's investing in leadership and
development and will reinforce courage in staff to come forward. We've spoken to
people from more than a dozen different fire services who've told us they've
been bullied, physically or sexually assaulted, raped. Some reported it and say
it wasn't dealt with properly. Others didn't even feel they could complain. We
can't tell you half of what we know because women are genuinely scared for their
safety if they speak out. When former Crown prosecutor Nazia Afzal was asked to
investigate the culture inside London Fire Brigade, he had to set up a secure
email address and meet people off station for many women even to feel safe
talking to him. He heard evidence from more than a third of women in the brigade
and they said being abused and degraded was routine. The amount of untreated
PTSD I found within London Fire Brigade was shocking. Women groped during
training exercises, women were a daily gauntlet of sexual abuse, some were even
punched and attacked. Some had the indignity of having photos of them taken
without their consent. Many were sexually taunted. One woman told us that she'd
received video calls from a man exposing his genitalia. Also had been receiving
inappropriate photographs. It was of this nature day in day out and it wears you
down. There was one day in which I sat down with nine different people, you
know, all women talking about their experiences one after another. At the end of
the day, we'd run out of tissues because of the amount of tears that had been
flowing. And I felt I needed counseling after hearing their stories. And so I
made sure that I got some help having listened to what these women had
experienced over the course of that one day, just me listening. So imagine what
it's like living that experience. Since Nazia Afsal's report came out in
November, more shocking revelations have lifted the lid on what life is like for
some in the fire service. Tonight's news investigation has uncovered really
shocking examples of sexual harassment with Endorset and Wiltshire fire service.
Last month, female firefighters in Dorset and Wiltshire revealed men they worked
with had been sending them unsolicited explicit photos and messages. One woman
said a colleague demanded sexual favors at the scene of a fire. Another that men
had taken photos of the dead bodies of women in car crashes and shared them on
WhatsApp. This was what the chief fire officer Ben Ansel said to ITV. I'm
saddened. I'm shocked. And I'm appalled. And I'm grateful for you bringing them
to our attention. And the assurance I'll give you is that we will look into
these allegations, we will follow the evidence and we will do the right thing.
We take this incredibly seriously. Farland Four has since spoken to a woman who
was a firefighter with Dorset and Wiltshire. We're calling her Helen. She says
the sexist and sexually predatory culture should come as no surprise to the
chief fire officer because she told the fire service about her treatment by two
male managers five years ago. I would have fire axes thrown at my head on drill.
I had my fire fire on but they threw them so hard the force would knock me to
the floor. They'd stand there and laugh. On drills they'd soak me with a hose.
They'd have it on such high pressure I'd be covered in bruises. It's beyond
belief. It hardly seems possible but it got worse. One of them, a middle aged
man, started sexually harassing me. He was old enough to be my dad. He started
to grab me when I was coming down ladders. He would lunge from my hips always
touching me around my waist and hips. One day he came right up to me and got
close to my face almost touching my nose. He breathed on me and I stepped back.
He grabbed me by the tunic, picked me up by my throat and smashed me into the
back of the pump. Three people witnessed it on the station that day. No one said
anything. One evening a couple of weeks later the watch was at the station for
training. They got to the end of the drill. I went to my locker to take my kit
off. I noticed the headlights of cars pulling out of the parade ground. I
thought shit they're all leaving. And then all the lights went out in the whole
station apart from the room I was in. He would have known I was in there and he
could see from the office. He came into the kit room with this really sinister
look on his face. He never said anything. He walked straight up to me. He
slammed me against the wall and tried to take my tunic trousers off. I knew I
was in trouble. I knew I had to get him off me. I was strong and my boyfriend
had taught me martial arts. I pushed him off me. I grabbed him by the shoulders
and I moved him 90 degrees. I ran to the door and drove home. Helen doesn't want
to think what might have happened if she hadn't got away. But there were no
witnesses and she didn't want to risk losing her job. So she stayed silent about
that terrifying night. Even though when she went into work she was petrified. I
was frightened of being left alone with him. I began to suffer from panic
attacks and developed a stammer. It was really bad anxiety, just fear. Fear
followed by disbelief. Within a few weeks I was told that I was unsuitable for
the role. I was told to get my gear and leave. My whole world fell apart that
night. Helen emailed the chief fire officer direct to tell him what had happened
and says afterwards she handed in a file giving dates and times of the bullying
and harassment she'd suffered. Dorset and Wiltshire Fire Service said when Chief
Fire Officer Ben Ansell received Helen's original email he did reply to her and
sent details to HR but it wasn't explicit that they'd been a sexual element to
the harassment she was complaining about. The service said they tried to contact
her to get more details but she'd failed to turn up at a meeting. Helen's
adamant she never got that reply. She says her union rep handed her full paper
file listing all the bullying and harassment incidents to the complaints
department at headquarters and that on three occasions both she and her rep
turned up for meetings only to get a phone call as they arrived in the car park
saying the meeting had been cancelled. I was advised to leave it and walk away.
I got told I was never going to win because they were too high ranking and I
wouldn't be believed. The men who harass and sexually assorted me are still in
high ranking positions to this day as far as I know. It's five years and I
haven't really recovered. It destroyed me. The brigade said Helen was dismissed
because she was incompetent and this decision had been reviewed by a senior
officer and upheld. Helen says that's just not the case. I came out top on knots
pumping and working at high and training school. I've never had any warning or
criticism on my record. I never put a foot wrong. I wanted the job more than
anything. When the allegations of appalling behaviour with Endorset and
Wiltshire Fire Service emerged last month they said they were launching an
investigation. That prompted Helen to write them again. The abuse and harassment
I endured within your brigade was absolutely horrendous. I was a competent,
enthusiastic, dedicated female firefighter that you should value and have been
lucky to have had on your staff. Everything I was made to endure still affects
me to this day. Justice has still never been served. Since we've taken up
Helen's case with Dorset and Wiltshire Fire Service it's offered to talk to her
again, to investigate her claims and take appropriate action. Helen didn't go to
the police about the man who attacked her but firefighters do come to the
attention of police forces. Farlon Fore can reveal that in the last four years
31 firefighters and staff have been reported to or investigated by police for
sexual allegations but only one has been sacked. 33 of the UK's 49 fire services
answered our Freedom of Information request. North Wales had five members of
staff reported to police. Most brigades wouldn't tell us if people had been
convicted but we know at least two were and six people are under investigation.
We also asked the question another way. We went to police forces for the number
of people reported for sexual allegations where the occupation was recorded as
firemen, firefighter or fire service staff. This would only ever be a very rough
guide because occupation wouldn't necessarily be known or entered on the police
system. But bearing those caveats in mind, just looking at the third of forces
that responded 34 people working for the fire service were reported to police.
There were nine allegations of rape. These cases are of course pretty rare. We
don't know how many of the alleged victims were firefighters but we do know it
happens. We can't go into detail in this programme but we've spoken to women who
say they've been sexually and physically attacked and have reported the abuse.
But we've also spoken to others who say they were too scared or had too little
faith in the police or the fire service to report it. I put this to Mark
Hardingham, the chair of the National Fire Chiefs Council. Women particularly
are, if you like, breaking cover and coming out and talking to the press, to the
media because they say they weren't listened to or they were too scared frankly
to speak up within the fire service. That's a failure by fire chiefs, isn't it,
if women feel A, that they're not safe going to work and B, they don't feel safe
talking about not feeling safe? You're quite right. I mean some of the stuff
that we've seen reported over recent weeks absolutely is a failure in the fire
and rescue service. There are a lot of things that we need to do. What I would
say though is that in and amongst the experiences that people have had, I'm sure
that every fire and rescue service will have equally examples where people have
been well supported through their fire service careers and issues that have
happened have been dealt with and dealt with robustly and appropriately. I think
what we're seeing at the moment is that's not been consistently the case in fire
services and across every fire and rescue service. When people object to this
kind of vile, invertical mass banter or object to being sexually harassed or
object to being racially harassed, often they say they're made to be the
problem, they're sent on conflict management courses, they're moved stationed,
they're silenced or actually they end up being disciplined. Do you agree that
sometimes the old boy's network swings into action and minimizes people's
complaints and makes it impossible for them to get help? Yeah, I accept in the
past that that has been the case. The chief forester and the senior leadership
team have a very important role but they can't do this alone. So if you see
something happening that doesn't feel right, doesn't look right, doesn't sound
right, it's not just for the victim to point that out and deal with it. Actually
the victim feels most supported when other people will step forward and say, I'm
sorry that's not right, that's not acceptable. Hard to do that if you're a
junior firefighter and you are being asked to call out an all-powerful station
manager or watch manager. This is an environment of command and control, of
rank. That's a big ask. I accept it is a big ask but actually it doesn't always
need to be the junior firefighter to call it out. What about the more senior
firefighter who might be seeing what's going on or another manager and I accept
entirely that is not an easy thing to do. Very difficult thing to do if you're
more experienced in the fire service and have been around longer but of course
increasingly difficult if you are new into the fire service or actually if
you're from an underrepresented group. Well yes, as we've heard some people
decide it's not worth getting involved. Katherine Billing is chief fire officer
in Cornwall and a leading member of Women in the Fire Service which is trying to
make the culture more progressive. Last year she had to sack five of her own
firefighters accused of exchanging pornographic photos and misogynistic and
racist messages on WhatsApp. I felt sick, I knew that we couldn't be immune but
when you actually find it and you actually see it, real sick things that they
were sharing and we're professional people that are public trust. You sacked
them and yet some would maintain they are the wronged party. They do say some of
them it was innocent banter. Another firefighter actually resigned in solidarity
with them and accused you of emasculating the fire service through some kind of
witch hunt. I mean what would you say to that? It probably shocks me just as
much as the content itself. I don't think any of us would have thought that what
they posted and what they discussed and their banter as they like to call it was
appropriate. What I did was right and it wasn't a step too far and it wasn't
emasculating the service maintaining professional standards and maintaining
integrity. You get tired of challenging a lot of the time and one thing that we
talk about as women is male allies are so important. Catherine Billing hopes the
next generation of men coming through will be the allies female firefighters
need. We've been told the selection tests are really big on diversity and
equality. But is that just a tick box exercise? Is firefighter training
perpetuating a toxic culture? It doesn't matter if you're male or female,
diversity across the fire service is huge. We all fit in and work together as a
team. Back in 2021 firefighters in West Yorkshire appeared on the small screen
in a fly on the wall BBC documentary. It was a big deal. The local news did a
story about it. There's plenty of banter, good food, plenty of laughs,
camaraderie and that's one of the main things and what attracts you to fire
service. But some new recruits who just made it through the vigorous assessments
and had started training with West Yorkshire were met with something quite
different. One we're calling Chris says the instructors set the tone from day
one. This isn't his voice but these are his words. Straight away they gave you
this impression you were like there on the bottom of their shoes and they've
been through the same when they were trainees. That was a mantra they repeated.
We've been through this shit so we're going to put you through this shit. One
trainer in particular told people that he would effing break the nose or break
the jaw or smash your face in. There was nothing off limits. There was jokes
about rape, there was jokes about Nazi Germany, there was jokes about burnt
children in houses, there was homophobic language. It was literally like you
couldn't say anything that was deemed too far. One of the trainers was very
vocal about his dislike for a particular section of the community, an ethnic
minority. He'd say they were always the ones to start fires and he referred to
them as the P word. This was a member of staff saying this to trainees. I've
been around lots and lots of groups of males and yes you hear the odd thing here
and there and it can get inappropriate sometimes but I have never ever been in a
situation where all of those offensive terms were used in such a short space of
time and with such venom and aggression. Why do you think this culture went on?
On an individual level I don't think they were bad people. I just think there
was such a toxic culture of banter, that's what they called it. The culture was
be as ruthless as you possibly can to each other. I can't believe more
firefighters don't kill themselves. That's how bad it is. It's extreme bullying.
Chris describes a hot house drill which simulates going into a fire in full kit
where a recruit collapsed with heat stroke. He says the instructors told them to
carry on with the exercise and when a female trainee raised the alarm she was
mocked. She said stop the drill, this person's convulsing. The firemen were like
stop being an effing girl and carry on with the drill and she said no no no no
no we need to stop. It got so bad that they called an ambulance. We told West
Yorkshire everything Chris had said about training. It said HR and senior
managers did investigate a complaint at the time but there was insufficient
evidence to substantiate it and that other trainees had been positive about the
instructors. The service said it condemns any form of discrimination. His
Majesty's Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services told us it
expects all services to investigate allegations like these thoroughly and
without delay. It said fire services have a long way to go when it comes to
equality and they can't afford to wait any longer to improve. One's pointed me
to a government report into the fire service from way back in 1999. It describes
the service as one of the last bastions of ladish culture. Where women are
flashed at, men watch porn at work, black firefighters are called the N word.
Judging by the evidence we've heard in this programme, in some areas not much
has changed in a quarter of a century. The MP Caroline Nokes is the Conservative
Chair of the Commons Women and Equality Committee. We shared our evidence with
her. When you look at the volume of testimonies and the repeated themes in them,
it's really obvious that the complaint system is not working as it currently is.
Now it strikes me that what you need at that point in the process is a clean
broom to come in. The fire service is not yet demonstrated that it can get its
own house in order. So maybe externally appointed investigators, a root and
branch review, what's gone on, how has this been allowed to perpetuate for so
long, who is going to take ownership of this, why are individual fire chiefs not
making sure that their fire services do not foster a culture of bullying and
harassment. If that has to come from outside, then it absolutely must because
you can't have a situation where this can go on for 20 years unchecked,
unchallenged. Inspectors rated both West Yorkshire Fire Service and Dorset and
Wiltshire where claims of appalling sexist behaviour have emerged as good when
it comes to their values and culture. We asked Caroline Nokes whether we can
trust the inspector to see what's really going on in fire stations. You can only
believe that the inspector is not doing the job adequately when you look at the
evidence from Dorset and Wiltshire and yet that culture was rated as good. That
culture was not good, is not good. And any culture which allows bullies,
abusers, harassers to stay in post while their victims are forced out is poor.
And what I would argue is that we need to make sure that the inspector are
inspecting the right things, that they're talking to the right people and that
they've been given access and indeed that individual firefighters have
confidence to speak to them freely and openly. But it strikes me that this is
also a job for the government itself to address what has gone wrong in the same
way that the Home Secretary has spoken out about the Met. She should be speaking
out about fire services. This clearly starts at entry and finishes at the top.
We've been asking the Home Office for an interview for weeks. They eventually
declined our request but sent a statement saying they've been clear in a white
paper that reform of the fire service is urgently needed. They said they would
work closely with the fire service, the inspectorate and the National Fire
Chiefs Council to make sure deeply concerning issues about culture in the sector
are addressed. Some fire chiefs are trying to cut rotten culture at the root.
Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue Service has sacked three firefighters and
suspended four others over offensive WhatsApp messages. And Northamptonshire has
sacked a manager after an investigation into inappropriate behaviour towards
women. For so long a culture of misogyny has relied on a culture of fear. But
women are starting to break their silence now. They can sense this is the moment
to fight fire with fire. They're going to the media, they're taking their
employers to tribunals. Dealing with misogyny could cost the fire service its
reputation and a lot of money. You'll remember Donna from the start of this
programme, who was inspired to become a firefighter after she lost her mum in a
car crash. She did fight back against the toxic culture. She went all the way to
the police and fire commissioner and he partially upheld her grievance. I think
if I wasn't sat here today they still wouldn't care. They like to promote all
the right things but practice none of them. And what is sad is there are
probably other people going through the same thing. She believes the managers at
her station wanted her out. If that's true, they got their wish. Donna resigned
last summer. But she won't resign herself to going quietly. She's taking
Staffordshire Fire and Rescue Service to a tribunal for constructive dismissal
and discrimination. You believe you were a good firefighter but you've burned
those bridges now. You can't go back to that. How hard is that to accept? Very
hard. It's sad. One of the real reasons why I wanted to be there in the first
place because of that sense of making a difference. I'm not really going to get
that, doing something else. It's a big loss. Yeah, a huge loss. It would be
easier if I'd have done something wrong or if I wasn't good at the job. But I
know that I'm more than capable of carrying out the job and it's just sad that
in today's society, this is even happening. The producer was Nicola Dowling, the
editor was Carl Johnston. And if you've been affected by sexual abuse or
violence, details of help and support is available at bbc.co.uk forward slash
action line. Or you can call for free at any time to hear recorded information
on 0800 077 077 0800 077 077. BBC Sounds And seven years ago, I was filming East
London Mosque when the story broke. The three schoolgirls from the area had gone
missing. They were heading to Syria to join the Islamic State group. Breaking
news this morning, three British schoolgirls are reportedly missing. Shaimina
Begum was the only one of the girls to emerge from the ashes of the so-called
caliphate. I've retraced her steps from the UK through Turkey and into Syria to
find people who knew her and to investigate the truth of her story. What do you
think people think of you? As a danger, as a risk, as a potential risk. From BBC
Radio 4, the Shaimina Begum story, series two of I'm Not a Monster. Listen on
BBC Sounds. Now Radio 4 Mark Coles profiles the composer Shirley J. Thompson.
You'll see what I want, what I really, really want. Don't tell me what you want,
what you really, really want. Music fit for a king this week. Some big names
ring promise for Charles the Third's coronation weekend in May. The Spice Girls
and Lionel Richie. Both rumoured to be on the bill for a celebratory concert in
the grounds of Windsor Castle. Cats composer Andrew Lloyd Webber. That's what I
call music. He's written a special coronation anthem for the ceremony in
Westminster Abbey. And there'll also be new works from some of Britain's leading
classical composers. Including the woman we're profiling this week, Shirley J.
Thompson. She is quite unique. She's a trailblazer. You can't put her in a box
and say she's that kind of composer and she writes that kind of music. Shirley
has bridged the gap between the European classical genre and her African black
Jamaican heritage. Thompson, one of the contemporary classical world's leading
lights, and more of an indie jazz world and wonky beats man myself. So time to
bring on an expert, I reckon. My name's Susannah Eastburn and I'm currently
chief executive of Sound and Music, which is the UK's national organisation for
new music. Perfect. Her music is incredibly beautiful, very communicative. She's
worked in film, she's worked in dance, she works with orchestras, she works in
education. So there's a lovely mix of things going on. The other thing is also
about the story she tells through her music. Shirley Thompson was born in
January 1958 in East Ham in London's East End, the eldest of five children. We
lived in a modest to up to down, just off of the main high street. Dad worked as
a forklift driver at Virgil Paint factory in Stratford and mum was a district
nurse. Parents Samuel and Hyacinth were in their early 20s when they moved to
Britain from Jamaica, part of the late 1950s windrush generation. And his
younger brother Richard takes up the story. Dad came over first, his ship came
into Dover and mum came over a couple of years later and came to do their bit to
help rebuild a war-torn UK. A father into his music. My dad had a radio ground,
a stand-alone turntable with a couple of speakers, a unit on the right and on
the left was a small drinks cabinet and it was all encased in one. You had your
small shot glasses on the left. So that was my dad's pride and joy. There was
always something being played, whether it be Rocksteady or Blue Beat or Country
Western albums. From an early age there was always musical out. We knew the
power of music. Hyacinth's own musical awakening started aged three when she
came across an old piano in the attic of her house next door. By four she was
playing the recorder, aren't we all, followed by the violin. Which she would
doggedly practise in the bedroom above the family lounge as they struggled to
watch TV. Well, there were times where we felt as though we needed a break. Her
parents encouraged her to join her local choir, the local youth orchestra too,
which she went on to lead. She did well at school, got good grades, until her
last year at Primary when Thompson told a recent TEDx Jamaica event she felt
teachers inexplicably started marking her down. And that for me was a watershed
moment when all my friends went to the grammar school and I, a girl of colour by
coincidence, were sent off to the worst school in the borough. The family
suspected discrimination. Her mother demanded to see the education chief, took
Shirley's school reports with her and eventually got the decision overturned.
Our mum, a really forthright woman, she would have gone to the ends of the earth
for any of her children. During school summer holidays Shirley would be put in
charge of her siblings tasked with keeping them entertained. Shirley was
instrumental in, you know, planning all of our games. As the youngest Richard
would often find himself rolled up in a blanket, his sister and the others
lifting him up and swinging him round and round in circles at speed. I couldn't
see anything at all. Sounds terrifying, will you not shout it? Shirley, stop it!
I think I was too terrified to vocalise anything. Shirley herself excelled at
more conventional sports, netball, long jump and sprinting. But her mum, not to
be messed with, said no to focusing on sport, thought studying was a far better
option. So in 1976 Shirley applied to study music, along with history, at
Liverpool University. Professor Robert Orlage remembers interviewing her back
then. She showed us a piece that she'd written for a trio, for flute, piano and
violin. It wasn't like anything that students normally do not have. I think we
offered to replace any A levels actually. It was while at Liverpool she first
met close friend Joan St John, the pair of them regularly out clubbing and going
to gigs. Earth, Wind and Fire I think was a particular favourite of hers, but
Shirley loves any music. It could be Soul, it could be Reggae, it could be
various different types of music. Music eventually got the upper hand over
history. Thompson an enthusiastic student, but determined to find her own
musical direction. To Liverpool she went to do a Masters in Composition at
London's Goldsmiths College, juggling it with working for a music publishing
company, using the money she earned to visit Jamaica for the first time.
Thompson eager to learn about her heritage, recalls distant cousin Steadman
Fuller, now Governor General of the Jamaican capital, Kingston. I call her a
cultural historian because she comes back and she wants to capture detail of the
lineage of the family and also meeting up with younger generations of the
family. Keen on her Jamaican food too. Yes, whenever she comes to Jamaica we
make sure that she goes out to get a serving of real authentic Jamaican meal,
especially prepared oxtail in Jamaican style or whether it's one of four dishes
of Caribbean fish. Back in the land of pie and mash, Thompson's first major
commission was for London's Greenwich International Festival, a chamber
orchestral work about Caribbean nations and their vision for self-determination.
In the late 80s and early 90s she turned to writing for film and television. Her
music for TV drama series South of the Border, selected as one of the BBC's top
20 themes back then. By the mid 90s she'd formed the Shirley Thompson Ensemble,
an unusual mix of instrumental soloists, singers, dancers, visual artists and
poets. She brings who she is into her music, her East London Jamaican origin,
her faith, all of those things are important and I think they feed into her
work. She was hired for her first Royal Engagements, performing for the Queen at
Westminster Abbey in 1999, then commissioned to compose a large-scale work to
commemorate the Golden Jubilee in 2002. Money, no object, she was told. It led
to New Nation Rising, a 21st century symphony, her first full orchestral work. A
huge piece celebrating a thousand year history of London, taking in watershed
moments in English history, going from rural idyll to industrial revolution,
through two world wars and onto the present day. Thompson introducing drums,
electric guitars, soul singers, even hip-hop to the orchestral mix. Some of
those themes also appeared in the London Olympic Games opening ceremony a decade
later, something Shirley Thompson was upset about because she felt she should
have been included. She was the first woman to compose and conduct a symphony in
the last 40 years in the UK. Thompson's younger brother Richard, my now a
photographer, was involved too, taking shots of the recording session for the
cover of what would become his sister's debut album release. It was then and
only then I realised that that was my sister conducting the Royal Philharmonic
Orchestra and kind of taking it in the stride. I experienced goosebumps, I had
to take a minute and I realised that this was a special person. For me, it was a
really proud moment. Her works have now been performed all over the world. Push,
the award-winning ballet she co-scored in 2005, toured for 15 years, staged in
more than 40 different countries. She's written works about Barack Obama, Nelson
Mandela, as well as the abolition of the slave trade. In the sort of narrower,
more traditional world of classical music, I do think her music isn't as
recognised as perhaps it should be. There are still some people who work in
classical music who have quite a limited view of what a composer should look and
sound like. So it's race and gender. In 2018, to mark the 70th anniversary of
the docking of the Empire Windrush, Thompson was commissioned to compose a new
anthem which was performed at a special service in Westminster Abbey. She's
really wanted to celebrate her parents' experience and I think she did that
wonderfully well. These kind of stories are not the ones we normally hear in a
classical music concert. The following year, she was awarded an OBE for her
services to music. Though establishment recognition wasn't going to mellow her
music's message. 2021's Song of the Prophets was about the global impact of
climate change, breathe, inspired by the Black Lives Matter movement. A lot of
the projects that she's done, she's effectively made them happen on her own, so
she's not only composed them, she's produced them, she's put the films together.
That means a staggering amount of work to do all of that. What little downtime
she gets, she likes to watch Mr Bean and Mr Fed. Absolutely loves tennis and is
a big Roger Federer fan. We've queued up outside Wimbledon many years ago and
one year we queued I think for seven hours, managed to get in CN hours tennis
and then that was the end of play. She's pretty au fait with football too, by
the sound of things. Commissioned by UEFA last year to write two pieces for the
Women's Euros, including the world's first concerto for footballers and
orchestra, which featured a score recorded by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra
as well as a choreographed routine of ball skills. They're rather Richard
impressed. I thought the Euros last year, you know, I thought that was a big
deal. Only to be trumped now by King Charles' latest invite, Shirley J.
Thompson, one of 12 composers he's personally handpicked to compose music for
his coronation on May the 6th. So what does Susanna Eastburne think we'll get? I
would be surprised if she did something kind of really serious and formal. I
imagine it will be very celebratory. She's done things for the Royal Family
before so I think they'll be kind of warmth in it as well. I'm beyond excited,
she tweeted this week, Shirley Thompson, an astute choice by the new King,
thinks her close friend, Joan St John. She encompasses so many different aspects
of life in the UK in the 21st century and she stands out there by herself and I
think she will be one of the ideal people to contribute to this. Profile was
presented by Mark Coles. The producer was Sally Abrams. And now the shipping
forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard
Agency at 1725 on Sunday 26th February. The general synopsis at midday. High,
Scotland, 1035, expected Cromartie, 1039, by midday tomorrow. Low near Corsica,
993, slow moving, filling 1004 by same time. The area forecasts for next 24
hours. Viking, northwest veering north 3-5, occasionally 6 later in east.
Showers, good. South of Sira, south of Sira, northerly 4-6, showers, good. 40s,
northerly 4-5, occasionally 6 in east. Showers, good. Cromartie, variable 2-4,
fair, good. 4th, north or northeast 2-4, showers at first, good. Tyne, Dogger,
north or northeast 4-5, showers, good. Fisher, northerly 4-6, decreasing 3 or
less in east, fair, good. German Beit, northerly 4-5, decreasing 3 or less in
east, fair, good. Humber, northeast 4-5, occasionally 3 later, showers, good.
Thames, northeast 4-6, showers, good. Dover, white, northeast 5-6, occasionally
7 at first, showers, good. Portland, Plymouth, northeast 5-7, showers in south,
good. Biscay, northeast 5-7, fair, good. South Fitzroy, easterly or
northeasterly 4-6, occasionally 7 in east, mainly fair, good, occasionally poor,
later in west. North Fitzroy, sole. Easterly or south easterly 5-7, perhaps
scale 8 later in far west sole. Showers, good. Lundy, east or northeast 4 or 5,
fair, good. Carsnet, east 4 or 5, occasionally 6 at first, fair, good. Irish
Sea, east or northeast 3-5, fair, good. Shannon, southeast 5-7, perhaps scale 8
later in west, fair, good. Rockall, south easterly 5-7, perhaps scale 8 later in
south west, fair, good. Malin, south easterly 3 or 4, occasionally 5 in west,
fair, good. Hebrides, southerly back in south easterly 2-4, occasionally 5 in
west, fair, good. Bailey, southerly back in south easterly 4-6, increasing 7 in
far south west, fair, good. Farrow, west becoming variable 2-4, fair, good.
Pharaohs, southwest 3-5, fair, good. Southeast Iceland, southwesterly back in
southerly 4-6, showers, good, occasionally moderate. That completes the shipping
forecast. Now more general forecast is Sarah Keith-Lucas. Thanks, John. Well,
high pressure keeping our weather largely dry and settled for the coming week.
There'll be some sunshine, night-time frosts and for many of us, little or no
rainfall in the forecast. But let's look at the rest of this evening and
overnight too. We've got a few well-scattered showers across parts of northern
England, one or two down towards Kent as well, mostly dry though elsewhere.
We'll see cloud across northern England drifting its way further south and west.
Sitting across central England into west Wales, east Anglia for instance, early
on tomorrow morning. But with clear skies across southern England, west Wales,
northern Ireland and Scotland, it's going to be quite cold. Temperatures here
below freezing could be minus 4 or minus 5 across Scotland. Winter Monday then,
England and Wales seeing a few well-scattered showers just drifting across
central and eastern areas, I think tending to ease out later on in the day.
Scotland and northern Ireland should be dry with long spells of sunshine. Light
winds here too, whereas it could be a little breezy for some of us further
south, especially down towards the English Channel. Temperatures across the UK
between about 7 to 10 degrees on Monday, typical for the time of year. And then
the outlook really through the rest of the week. It's remaining largely dry and
settled. Average temperatures for the time of year. But we could well see some
more persistent showery rain moving into the southeast during the course of
Tuesday. As that clears away, high pressure brings light winds and sunny spells
for many of us. Sarah Keith Lucas. Adam Porto will be choosing his pick of the
week in 15 minutes. And with a peak preview, here he is now. After the first
anniversary of the invasion of Ukraine, we find out how ordinary Ukrainians
helped their country win the information war and how refugees who came to
Britain are faring. How did woke become one of the most controversial words in
the culture wars? And what has gaslighting got to do with gaslights? Plus how
the Queen demanded an appearance with James Bond. And if forced, would you
choose to live in Walford or Mordor? Join me, Adam Porter, for Pick of the Week,
this evening at quarter past six.