TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 when you can hear the red-throated diver. And of course you can hear all the
tweets right now on BBC Sounds. Good morning. It's six o'clock on Friday the
24th of February. This is Today with Martha Carney in London and Lise Doucette
in Kiev. It's a grey, cold winter's day here, minus three degrees in this
wartime city of checkpoints, some shortages, a curfew from 11pm to 5am. The
capital of a country where air raid sirens are now the soundtrack of everyday
life. Our headline this morning. Ceremonies will be held across Ukraine to mark
exactly one year since the start of Russia's full-scale invasion. Ukraine's
President Zelensky has insisted this conflict will end with victory for his
country. We'll dedicate most of today's programme to marking this momentous
anniversary. We'll catch up with some of the people we featured in our reporting
to hear how they're faring a year into this war. And I've been speaking to the
most senior woman in the Ukrainian military, Lieutenant Colonel Larisa
Yakubchuk. Sometimes it's difficult for men to accept that their commander is a
woman. I always say firstly I'm an officer, then I'm a woman, and then I'm
blonde. We'll also hear from Ukrainian ministers, the UK's Defence Secretary Ben
Wallace, and a specially recorded essay by Ukraine's Booker Prize-winning author
Andrei Kurkov. It is difficult for me to remember life in pre-war Ukraine. It's
not that I have forgotten exactly, it's just that it now seems like a fairy
tale, like something I heard about as a child. And throughout the programme,
we'll hear live from our correspondents, including Orla Girin, James Waterhouse,
Jeremy Bowen, and Steve Rosenberg. Our other headline this morning, the
government says it's considering changing the law to ensure criminals who refuse
to attend court for sentencing are given longer prison terms. Also in the
programme… It's important to make sure that we cherish the specialisms that we
have in this country. A lot of people would be eating turnips right now rather
than thinking necessarily about aspects of lettuce and tomatoes and similar.
With the rationing of fresh produce in a number of supermarkets, should we be
eating more seasonally and… 393 miles along the permanent way from London,
Edinburgh's Waverley station was ready to receive the giant of the steam age.
Despite the anxieties of some, she wasn't going any further. It was the end of
the line. To mark the centenary of the Flying Scotsman, the poet laureate Simon
Armitage will be reading a poem composed in its honour. And why does being part
of a couple mean you live longer, but only if you're a man? The BBC News is read
by Alan Smith. People in Ukraine are preparing to mark a year of war on the
first anniversary of Russia's full-scale invasion. Ceremonies will take place
across the country, remembering those killed or forced to flee from the
conflict. And President Zelensky is due to hold what's expected to be a defiant
news conference. He's warned that evil is still around, but insisted that the
battle will end with Ukraine's victory. Our correspondent James Waterhouse
reports from Kiev. On this morning last year, the thuds of explosions and sight
of 150,000 Russian troops crossing the border marked the moment that Ukraine and
the world changed forever. Despite being outnumbered against one of the biggest
armies on the planet, Ukraine would win the battle for Kiev. It is, however,
still fighting for its survival. Invading forces occupy almost a fifth of the
country and are throwing everything at trying to take the eastern Donbass
region. President Zelensky has described the situation in the south as dangerous
and the eastern front as very difficult and painful. As the country waits for
more Western hardware, such as tanks, to try and break the deadlock, it's
marking this anniversary with ceremonies across Ukraine. On February 24th,
millions of us made a choice, said Mr Zelensky in his overnight address. Not a
white flag, but a blue and yellow flag, not fleeing, but facing. Rishi Sunak
will urge allies to increase military support to Ukraine during a meeting of G7
countries to mark today's anniversary. Mr Sunak will also join people across the
UK observing a minute's silence, as our political correspondent David Wallace-
Lockhart reports. At 11 o'clock this morning, many people in the UK will fall
silent to mark the anniversary of Russia's invasion. The Prime Minister then
hopes to use his voice to increase support for the Ukrainian cause. At a virtual
meeting of leaders from the G7 advanced economies, Rishi Sunak will call on
countries to move faster in supplying artillery, armour and air defence systems
to Ukraine. The Prime Minister will also reiterate his offer to train fighter
pilots, though there are no immediate plans for the UK to provide aircraft.
Justice Secretary Dominic Raab has said the government is looking carefully at
changing the law to ensure people convicted of serious crimes are given longer
jail terms if they refuse to appear in court for sentencing. Mr Raab said he
would not rule out using force to get some offenders out of their cell and into
the dock. Here's our Home Affairs correspondent June Kelly. Dominic Raab's
pledge to bring in tougher rules and penalties for convicted criminals who
refuse to attend their sentencing came during a meeting with the family of a
murder victim Zahra Alina. Ms Alina's killer, Jordan McSweeney, who was jailed
for 38 years, chose not to be in the dock for his sentencing. He was condemned
as spineless by the judge. Zahra Alina's aunt, Farah Naz, described McSweeney's
refusal to appear and hear the family's statements as a slap in the face. The
family of the schoolteacher Sabina Nesser, whose killer also wouldn't come into
court for sentencing, have been campaigning on the issue as well. Police have
arrested a fourth man in connection with a gun attack on an off-duty officer in
Ulmer. Northern Ireland's Police Federation says Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell suffered life-changing injuries in the shooting on Wednesday. Officers
say they're focusing their investigation on violent dissident Republicans.
Nominations for candidates to replace Nicola Sturgeon as the leader of the SNP
close at noon. The winner of the contest will be announced at the end of March.
Here's our Scotland editor James Cook. The SNP is holding a rapid contest to
elect a new leader before Easter, a pace which some activists worry will stifle
debate. The two best-known candidates are under pressure. Humza Yousaf, because
his plan to fix the health service was criticised by an official report, Kate
Forbes for saying she would have voted against gay marriage. The third
contender, Ash Regan, quit the Scottish government last year over plans to make
it easier to legally change gender. She launches her campaign in Fife this
morning. Research carried out for BBC News suggests the price of pasta has
nearly doubled in two years. The average cost of a 500g bag from the standard
range at four supermarkets is now 95p compared with 50p in 2021. A basket of 15
popular food items from the same supermarkets has risen in price by more than a
third over the same period. Overall inflation last month stood at 10.1%, but the
prices of many food items have risen more sharply and are still rising. And the
poet laureate Simon Armitage has written a new poem to celebrate the centenary
of the Flying Scotsman. The world's most famous steam locomotive set off on its
first journey 100 years ago today. The poem's on display as part of an
exhibition at the National Railway Museum in York. And he's going to be reading
it to us for the first time live this morning at 20 past eight. The time now is
seven minutes past six. Let's hear about the day's weather from Sarah Keith-
Lucas. Hi Sarah. Good morning to you Martha. Well we've got quite a chilly start
to the day across parts of southern England in particular with clearer skies
first thing. There's a touch of frost around but for most of us we've got quite
a lot of cloud around first thing this morning. Cloud and outbreaks of patchy
rain that's set to slowly shift south through the day and then more sunshine but
a cold northerly wind developing from the north. So to put some detail on that
all of southern England Wales the Midlands and eastern England will stay fairly
cloudy through the day after those initial clear skies in the far south. So a
frontal system moving south patchy outbreaks of light rain and drizzle at times
certainly won't be raining all day. Something a little bit brighter and drier
though through the second half of the afternoon and temperatures here around
eight to eleven degrees. For northern England Northern Ireland and southwest
Scotland that front is producing outbreaks of rain certainly over the next few
hours but they'll tend to peter out and clear southwards. So sunny spells
developing through the middle part of the day. Quite a cold northerly breeze
particularly close to the east coast as well you'll really notice it'll feel a
little bit colder here. Eight to eleven for most but just one or two wintry
showers for perhaps the Pennines the North York Moors for instance too. Eastern
and Northern Scotland lastly and here clearer skies developing over the next
hour or two. Quite a cold day with that northerly wind. There will be a mix of
sunny spells and scattered showers and over the higher ground some of those
showers a little bit wintry. Top temperatures here six or seven degrees and
things looking mostly dry but cold through the weekend. And now for a look at
this morning's papers and what's on the main news websites. Well many are
marking this first anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine. As the Times
puts it Ukraine's year of blood. It reports that Rishish Sunak will renew
Britain's offer to send typhoon jets to Poland or any other Eastern European
country that will hand over their MiG-29 combat aircraft to Kiev. The paper says
the Prime Minister is expected to urge NATO to give Ukraine a decisive advantage
over Russia on the battlefield to shift the mindset he says of President Putin.
The Guardian focuses on the devastation in the city of Mariupol which it calls
perhaps the bloodiest and most shocking chapter of Russia's brutal war. It tells
how after crushing resistance last May Russian forces have been erasing evidence
of recent atrocities and destroying the Ukrainian history in the city. The
continued defiance of Ukraine is highlighted by the Metro which has the headline
Heroes never give in. Well this war has led to 100,000 civilian deaths according
to the Independent. It attributes that figure ten times the official total to
Ukraine's top war crimes prosecutor. He tells the website the bodies will have
to be found and identified after the country is liberated. The Daily Telegraph's
main news is an article by the Archbishop of Canterbury. He argues that Russia
mustn't be crushed in any future peace deal. Justin Welby writes that Russia
cannot be allowed to repeat its aggression but mustn't be humiliated in the way
that Germany was after the First World War. He says Ukraine mustn't be pressured
into an unjust peace either. The Guardian also publishes a poll which suggests
that 65% of people in the UK believe Britain should maintain or increase its
support for Ukraine. Both the Daily Mail and the Daily Express lead with
comments by the Queen Consort urging authors to resist curbs on their freedom of
expression and imagination. The Mail describes Camilla as wading into the row
about the woke rewriting of Roland Dahl's classics. The Express quotes a source
close to Camilla as saying she was dismayed that the publisher's puffin had made
hundreds of changes to the original text of the much-loved children's books. A
claim that Rishi Sunak is softening his position towards striking NHS workers
makes the Eyes front page. It reports that ministers plan to invite in three
other unions, Unite, GMB and Unison, for pay talks after making an offer to the
Royal College of Nursing. The paper suggests that the government mood music on
ambulance workers and health staff is now changing with an olive branch set to
be offered next week. The Sun, under an exclusive banner, claims that Vernon
Kaye will replace Ken Bruce in that mid-morning slot on Radio 2. Ken Bruce had
revealed last month that he would be leaving the BBC. The corporation has yet to
confirm who will replace him. And the Daily Mirror and the Daily Star mock
yesterday's advice from the government minister Therese Coffey on how to get
round fruit and veg shortages. Let them eat turnips is the headline in both
papers. The Mirror calls her advice bizarre. The Star describes the vegetable as
a government-approved tasty treat and its front page offers a cut-out and keep
turnip for every peasant. And that's the paper review. One year on, this war
still rages and Russia now controls about a fifth of Ukraine's territory in
eastern and southern parts of this country. From the very beginning, one of
Moscow's most important strategic goals has been the complete capture of eastern
Ukraine, the area known as the Donbass, where its forces first moved in in 2014.
At this moment, the fight is focused around Bakhmut, an eastern city laid to
waste. After months of battle, it's a place of blackened buildings and empty
streets, a target both sides are bent on taking. Our senior international
correspondent Orla Giernan now joins us from outside the city. And Orla, there's
been reports that the fighting by Russian forces has intensified in the run-up
to this anniversary. Is that what you've been seeing on the ground? Well that
was definitely the case, Liz, when we were inside Bakhmut last week. We've been
inside the city twice and it is literally a situation where the shelling does
not stop. We could see that Ukrainian forces were under pressure. They told us
that they were lacking in all kinds of ammunition, but particularly shells. They
said they also needed encrypted communication devices. They even need armoured
vehicles to move their troops around. Even under the intense bombardment that we
could see and hear, troops were moving on foot and they were being transported
around the city in regular civilian SUVs. Now the battle has gone on since last
July. Russian has intensified step by step. It began originally with wave after
wave of fighters from the Wagner mercenary group, but that has been supplemented
in recent times by regular Russian troops. But the state of play is that
Ukraine, against the odds, is still holding that city, but the Russians
crucially have control over the two main roads. There is now one back route into
that city and that back route is coming under intense shelling. So the question
arises, how much longer will Ukrainian forces be able to hold on? I suspect a
decision will have to be made at some point to withdraw. Yes, and as you know,
there have been reports from Western capitals that some are urging President
Zelensky to pull back, to use his forces in other more important battles. And
yet we hear from Ukrainians they're going to fight for every inch. There is
pressure to pull out the troops from Bapmud while there is still time. Once that
last supply route is cut off, it will be too late. We know from sources inside
the city that the Russians have now advanced on two sides. They're about two
kilometres away on both the left and right hand side of that road. Now, I've
driven down this road on this visit and on previous visits. It's a hairy
experience all the time because it is extremely exposed and once that is cut,
there can be no more resupply for the troops inside. Now, there is a school of
thought, particularly abroad, that Ukraine would be better served by pulling out
the troops while it can, save the lives, save the resources to fight elsewhere.
When you say that to troops inside, they have a counter argument. They say,
look, we are tying down the Russians here, we are keeping them bogged down in
this battle and we're stopping them from moving on elsewhere. And I think the
indications now are that Ukraine will certainly try to hang on for a while.
Paula Geeran, thank you for your work and the work of your team in Bakhmut. And
at 16 minutes past six, we continue with our coverage one year on from Russia's
invasion of Ukraine because how have businesses operating in the country
managed? Well, Felicity Hanna has more. Morning, Felicity. Morning, Martha. Yes,
the economic impacts of the war have been felt globally, of course, nowhere more
profoundly than Ukraine itself. Let's talk to Charles Hecker, who's a partner at
Control Risks, an international risk consultancy. It advises more than 70
percent of FTSE 100 companies. And we originally spoke to him in the days
following Russia's advance into Ukraine. Charles, good morning. Good morning,
Felicity. Last year, you told us that your clients were very worried about their
businesses in Russia and Ukraine, but understandably extremely anxious about
their staff and what might happen to them. What's the mood now? Well, you're
right, Felicity. I mean, we're now a year into a conflict that none of the
parties to this engagement thought would last this long. And so the number one
question on the minds of the international business community is how and when
this is all going to end. And the answer to that is probably no time soon. You
know, our most likely scenario for the conflict going forward is that it will
continue at its current level of intensity or perhaps even escalate for at least
the next 12 months. And so if we were to have this conversation again, Felicity,
a year from now, we might be talking about the same level of combat on the
ground in Ukraine. How are you supporting businesses in Ukraine? How much
business is happening in Ukraine? Well, I mean, Ukrainian GDP has taken a
catastrophic hit as a result of the war. But if you look across the different
regions, there are still companies that are on the ground and present in Ukraine
because they can or because they have to be. We recently opened up an office in
Kiev and for international businesses that want to or have to visit their
premises for reasons of business continuity and also to understand the dynamics
of the conflict and how it's impacting their business on the ground. You know,
there is a way to get in and out of the country and to maintain a presence there
safely as long as you're taking into very, very careful consideration the
dynamics of an extremely fluid conflict. Are businesses telling you that they're
looking to get back into Russia? Yes. There are already questions coming from
the business community about when they can go back into Russia. And a question
also that comes right on the heels of that is what kind of Russia would we be
going back into? And I think behind all of this are questions and concerns about
sanctions and the durability of the sanctions that the UK, the EU, the US and
the rest of the G7 have put on Russia. And for the time being, those sanctions
are going to remain. It's been relatively swift and relatively easy to impose
those sanctions. That's one of the things that surprised all of the parties to
the conflict is the unity and the unanimity of sanctions from the international
community. It's extremely difficult to reverse sanctions. It's extremely
difficult to lift them. And while the conflict rages and even if there were some
pause in the hostilities, it's highly unlikely that we're going to see any
sanctions relief for a very long time to come. And of course, the sanctions
weren't just in one direction. We have Russia's retaliation in supplying energy
to Europe. Do you expect more of the same? Is that going to continue? Yeah,
there was a complete rewriting essentially as a result of the conflict. There
was a complete rewriting of the European and in fact, the global energy markets.
And at some point, the taps to Europe, whether it's oil or gas, are going to
turn off completely from Russia. And yeah, Russia will continue to try to
reprogram its energy sector to pivot away from what was once its biggest
customer to try to develop other customers and encourage those who are currently
buying Russian energy to buy more. That's a long play. That's a slow play. It
takes an enormous amount of infrastructure to reorient energy markets. But
that's probably the direction of travel for Russia in the near future. Now your
organisation Control Risks, you've opened an office in Kyiv, you're expanding
within Ukraine. What's it like doing business, developing business there? Well,
for the time being, we're focusing on companies that are already in Ukraine and
who have maintained their business presence. There will come a time when Ukraine
has to rebuild and that's once hostilities are over. The budget for rebuilding
Ukraine is estimated to approach something like a trillion dollars and that will
start with rebuilding critical national infrastructure and then we'll move on to
rebuilding other sectors of the Ukrainian economy. A lot of that investment will
come from European businesses because they're the closest to Ukraine and there
will be, including from companies like us, on the ground support to make sure
that that can be done safely, to make sure it can be done securely. Again, with
a sort of critical eye towards potential triggers and drivers of change in the
security situation on the ground and also in the investment environment going
forward. Charles Hecker, partner at Control Risks, thank you very much for
joining us again this morning. Let's turn to Jane Foley, Senior Effects
Strategist at Rabobank. Jane, good morning. Good morning. One year on then, how
much have the markets recovered from the initial shock and volatility that
followed the invasion? Well, it depends which market you're talking about.
Certainly, the biggest, as you mentioned, was oil and gas and that of course has
had real knock-on effects and European economy to start off with, for instance,
there are estimates that the German economy could be about 2.5% or maybe even 4%
lower than what it would have been and that is because of the impact of the
higher energy prices. But those, of course, have come right off, partly because
of course we've seen a warm winter in Europe and the same can be said for some
commodity prices. Wheat, for instance, has backed down to the levels it was
before the war. That's partly related to the fact that the yields in Russian
growing have been really quite strong, were last year. That might change, but as
we've noted before, we've seen food price inflation remaining very high, even
though commodity prices have generally come off and this is because of the
delayed reaction through the supply processes. Higher fertilizer prices, for
instance, from last year, higher growth prices from last year are still coming
through into what we're seeing in the supermarket prices now. So, there is still
an awful lot of ramifications hitting us all. Let's be a bit more recent.
There's been some stock market volatility, global equities have rebounded from
earlier losses on Thursday. What's going on and what's driving it? Well,
actually, February has been a poor month for stock prices generally, a poor
month for risk appetite and that goes against the improvement in risk appetite
that we saw at the start of the year. Now, a large part of the reason that the
markets are more concerned right now is this fear that actually interest rates
in the Federal Reserve in the US and elsewhere in the world too might have to be
higher for longer. What we're seeing is resilience in economies such as the US
in particular, but also here in the UK too. Some economic data showing a bit
more resilience than we had feared and that suggests that in order for central
banks to push demand lower, to get inflation lower, they may have to work harder
and put interest rates higher than the market was thinking. Jane Foley from
Rabobank, thank you very much. Let's stay with inflation because yesterday we
brought you news that food service price inflation had fallen from 22.9% in
December to 22% in January, falling for the first time since September 2021.
Today, new research for the BBC shows the cost of a basket of 15 popular food
items has risen in price by more than a third over two years. The retail
research firm Associa has been tracking the prices of items at Asda, Tesco,
Morrisons and Sainsbury's. It found, for example, the average cost of a 500 gram
bag of pasta from the standard range is now 95 pence compared with 50 pence in
2021. James Walton is the Chief Economist at the Institute of Grocery
Distribution, which provides insights to the grocery sector. James, good
morning. Good morning. So official figures suggest that overall inflation may
have peaked. This research though shows some food prices are still rising
sharply. Why? The previous lady actually hinted at it and the major reason is
that the food supply chain is very, very long and very, very complicated. So
before your food arrives on your plate, it's gone through a lot of processes,
it's gone through a lot of hands and therefore it takes some time for a cost
increase at the top of the supply chain, maybe on the farm to feed through all
of those contractual relationships to you at the till. With that in mind then,
when can we expect the rate of food inflation to come down? Well, we anticipate
that food price inflation is going to peak in the early part of 2023 and will
then start to slow down as the year progresses. But we do think that food
inflation will still be above zero at the end of this year. So we're still
talking about ongoing price change but at a declining rate. And the cumulative
effect of that of course is extremely damaging for households because you're
looking at inflation on top of inflation and of course a lot of households are
very vulnerable to that. And of course food inflation can hit lower income
households even harder. What kind of impact could the fresh food shortages like
we've seen this week have? The fresh food shortages that we are seeing at the
moment are not unprecedented. But when we see them in combination with
inflation, what they do is reduce the shoppers' ability to maneuver. Because
when shoppers see prices going up, they don't let themselves be kicked about
helplessly by that. They act – shoppers are very dynamic. They look at what's
going on and they make choices to protect themselves. Perhaps they move from one
store to another store to get a better deal or they change the types of products
that they're buying. But of course if a lot of those fresh foods are temporarily
unavailable, they have less space to change. What kind of impact does this have
on the grocery sector? You're advising that sector. Does it change retail
habits? Yes. Of course retailers and suppliers both want food to be available
for shoppers. And from the start of this inflation event, what we've seen is
ranges being changed in order to change the average price point downwards. So,
what you'll see is retailers, for example, taking out some of the more expensive
items, perhaps some of the premium owned label items and putting more emphasis
on the basics because those are the things that shoppers are going to want as
they try to manage their grocery spend. And lots of retailers really focusing on
price in their marketing at the moment. James Walton, Chief Economist at the
Institute of Grocery Distribution. Thank you very much. And thank you, Fliss.
And we're going to be looking at food shortages ourselves at 10.28 and the Great
Turnip debate. Time now, 28 minutes past six. Gary's here with the Sport
Morning, Gary. Great Turnip. I was worried for a moment. I did leave a small
pause. I know you did. Pauses are good on radio. A great win for Manchester
United. Details on the way, but first reflections on a great day for England in
the second test against New Zealand. Harry Brook and Joe Root are making
headlines. Reign brought an end to play with England on 315 for three, but
Brook, 184 not out and Root, 101 not out. Let's cross to the ground in
Wellington. Good morning to our reporter, Stephen Shemmelt, who can give us all
the details. Stephen. Good morning, Gary. It was a stand of 294 runs between
Brook and Joe Root. England had been 21 for three after being put into bat on a
green pit. Zach Crawley, Olly Pope and Ben Duckett all falling cheaply. But
Brook led a counterattack for his fourth hundred in six tests. Root moved into
his slipstream with his first hundred in eight tests, 101 not out, the former
captain. It was quite disdainful at times from the Yorkshire pair. Who knows
where England might have been at the reign not arrived. We only had 65 of the
scheduled 90 overs, but power to come for England tomorrow. They could rack up a
huge total. And just put into context this Brookenings, 184 not out. You've
written lots of interesting articles on him on the website. I mean, it was an
incredible day for him. We're running out of things to say about him, Gary. He's
only played six test matches, so maybe we should just let the numbers do the
talking. No England batter has got to four hundreds quicker than the nine
innings taken by Brook. His 108, 107 runs rather and counting because he's still
not out is the most by any batter in the history of Test cricket after nine
innings. He's an incredible talent and to think he only got his chance at the
end of last summer when Johnny Bairstow slipped on a golf course and broke his
leg. That was in September. Well, since then, Harry Brook has pocketed a T20
World Cup winner's medal and now he's tearing up the record Brooks in Test
cricket. Thank you, Stefan. Much more on the cricket later in the programme and
much more on the football later in the programme where Manchester United are
through to the last 16 of the Europa League. They came from behind to beat
Barcelona 2-1. Fred and Anthony scored their goals. Andy Murray is through to
the semi-final of the Qatar Open. He came from a set down to beat the French
qualifier Alexander Muller. Super League, Hulk AR made it two wins from two,
defeating Salford's 24-10. Let's give you the tips. Warwick at 2.30, number one.
Henry the second and then we're off to Wolverhampton at 7.15, number seven, Send
in the Clouds. Thanks very much, Gary. Exclusive performances by much loved
artists. Together with the BBC Concert Orchestra. From classic tracks to brand
new covers. Radio 2's Piano Room. Watch on iPlayer, listen on BBC Sounds.
Another time is 6.31. You're listening to Today on BBC Radio 4 with Martha
Carney and Lise Doucette. And now a summary of the news from Alan Smith.
Ceremonies will take place across Ukraine today as the country marks the first
anniversary of Russia's full-scale invasion. People will gather to remember
those killed or forced to flee from the conflict. President Zelensky will speak
later in what's expected to be a defiant news conference. Rishi Sunak will use a
virtual meeting of the world's most advanced economies, the G7, to call for an
increase in military support for Ukraine. The Prime Minister will join people
across the UK observing a minute's silence at 11 o'clock. Last night the United
Nations called on Moscow to withdraw its troops from Ukraine's territory. The
motion was backed by 141 nations. 32 countries abstained and seven, including
Russia, voted against. The resolution is not legally binding. Police have
arrested a fourth man in connection with a gun attack on an off-duty officer in
Oma. Northern Ireland's Police Federation says Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell suffered life-changing injuries in the shooting on Wednesday. Officers
say they're focusing their investigation on dissident Republicans. The Justice
Secretary Dominic Raab is considering longer jail terms for serious criminals
who refused to appear in court for sentencing. Mr Raab said he would not rule
out using force to get some offenders out of their cell and into the dock. His
comments follow several murder cases where the defendants refused to go to court
to be sentenced. Nominations for candidates hoping to replace Nicola Sturgeon as
leader of the SNP and Scotland's first minister will close at noon. Three
politicians have so far announced they will stand. The Scottish Health
Secretary, Humza Yousaf, the Scottish Finance Secretary, Kate Forbes, and the
former minister, Ash Regan. And a study of food prices for BBC News suggests
that the cost of pasta has nearly doubled in two years. The average price of a
500-gram bag from the standard range at four supermarkets is now 95 pence,
compared with 50 pence in 2021. The cost of a basket of 15 popular food items
from the same shops has risen by more than a third over the same period. Thank
you, Alan Smith. February the 24th, 2022, is a day seared in memory, a time
steeped in history. At this time, exactly one year ago, Russia's invasion of
Ukraine was only hours old, the biggest attack on a European state since the
Second World War, an assault from the east, the south, and the north on land,
sea, and air. In a televised address before first light, Russia's President
Vladimir Putin had declared what he called a special military operation, forced,
he said, by Ukraine's threats to Russia. Explosions and gunfire rocked this
city. We were all jolted from sleep by the sounds of war, the wail of the air
raid siren. Well, I'm joined here in our temporary studio in Kyiv by James
Waterhouse. He's the BBC's Ukraine correspondent. James, you were also in Kyiv
on that momentous morning. I still feel a chill thinking about it. What stays
with you? Just the speed, Lise, where the shadow of war descended on Kyiv. You
know, you and I were working the night before, and Kyiv was just like any other
European city, wasn't it? And we wandered around and we spoke to people. And
even with Vladimir Putin doing things like officially recognising those
separatist territories and the rhetoric ramping up, there was a disconnect.
Because what Ukrainians would say is, well, who is right? Is the West right by
saying it's going to happen? Or is, you know, President Zelensky right in that
we shouldn't panic and just, you know, not play into Russia's hands? And that
morning, you know, the city changed in the click of a finger. And I remember
surfacing with you and we walked around and, you know, there was panic and there
was fear and the streets just hollowed out. There were empties. People tried to
leave in their millions or they stayed to either take shelter or fight. And it's
that morning and the speed of events which will really stay with me. Today's
another moment. What lies ahead? Well, I think we're going to see both sides
trying to seize the initiative where we are talking in the midst of a really
static period where we are seeing Russian forces already starting their spring
offensive, throwing everything, this vast eastern front line to huge cost for
both sides. And we have Ukraine patiently waiting for more Western hardware to
arrive, like tanks to try and unlock things. They see it as a way to kind of
concentrate on the front, an area of the front line, push through with infantry
and achieve their dream of repelling Russia completely. But complete liberation
right now feels a very, very long way off. And the two Ukrainians are still
saying this is a war we can and will win and we'll win it this year. James
Waterhouse, thank you for all of your work. And it's a war which has meant that
so many people have been forced to leave their homes after the start of the war.
Almost four million Ukrainians crossed into Poland. Some moved on, others
settled there and still more arrive every day. Well, we can talk now to Sarah
Rainsford, BBC's Eastern European correspondent, who's in Poland. Good morning,
Sarah. And I remember very vividly your reports a year ago of all those people
arriving in the stations in Poland. And what's the situation now? Well, there
are still people crossing the border, but far fewer than there were a year ago,
of course. I was in eastern Ukraine at the time and there were huge numbers of
panicked people then in the days after the beginning of this war a year ago who
were flooding to train stations in terror, basically, because they just didn't
know what lay ahead. The war had started, the explosions were going off and
those chilling air raid sirens had started to sound. And so people were flooding
out in their millions. And I just remember that the goodbyes, you know, the
separations, the men staying behind and the women and the children crushing onto
trains. Now, they are still coming across and people are still coming across for
the first time into Poland. I spoke to people and I asked them why they were
coming and a lot of people told me they were really terrified that Vladimir
Putin was going to do something even more wretched to mark this anniversary. And
they said there were lots of rumours, lots of information even that something
might happen. So people who, for example, I met families who'd lived under
occupation inside Ukraine who said they couldn't face that happening again. So
they were leaving, even though these families I was speaking to didn't know
where they were going. So I think, you know, this kind of just depressed and
tired mood now. It was panic a year ago. Now, it's just this sense that they
don't know what the future holds still. Many people left just for a few days.
They're still here a year later. And it's hard to build a life when you don't
know what the future is. And I think, you know, that that's what I'm finding
reflected in the people I'm talking to here. And huge changes too for the people
of Poland. Yeah, this is a country which has really mobilised to help
Ukrainians. It's been quite staggering. I think many Poles I've spoken to are
almost staggered themselves at how people here have been so incredibly
supportive of people in Ukraine. And the Ukrainians are very grateful for that.
But it has changed Poland. You know, Warsaw is a city that you walk around now,
and you hear Russian and Ukrainian spoken on every street. I've been staggered
by how many people here have moved to Poland. And you know, many of them are
integrating, many of them are doing well. Polish as a language is quite close to
Ukrainian. So people are finding it relatively easy to fit in here to learn the
language. I've seen lots of children going to Polish schools and the officials
that I've spoken to say, you know, the schools are coping, they're not
struggling to find places. So it's going okay. But you know, speak to the
Ukrainians themselves and speak to the psychologists, for example, who are
working with them. And they're saying that they're trying to tell people that
it's all about living for today, that they have to focus on the fact that
they're not in basements, they're not under fire, they are safe here, and try
somehow to figure out how they go forward when so many people are saying they
don't see any end to this coming soon. Sarah Rainsford, many thanks. Time now is
20 to seven. And let's turn to politics back here and who's going to take over
from Nicola Sturgeon as First Minister of Scotland. The candidates have to
declare by lunchtime today. Let's talk to James Cook, our Scotland editor, and
just remind us of who's standing, James. Well, Martha Hamza Yousaf, the current
Health Secretary, is standing. Also Kate Forbes, she's Finance Secretary in the
Scottish Government, but she's on maternity leave. She's come back off her
maternity leave to stand. And the third candidate whose campaign will be
launched today, looking out over the Firth and Forth in Fife, is Ash Regan, the
former Community Safety Minister who resigned from the Scottish Government in
protest at plans to make it easier to legally change gender. And the first week
of the campaign has really been dominated by Ms Forbes and a row over her
beliefs. She's a member of the Presbyterian Free Church of Scotland and she has
been opposed to gay marriage. She's been socially conservative on other issues
too, but crucially, she said she would have voted against gay marriage when that
bill was passed in 2014. She wasn't in Parliament at the time and that's
provoked something of a row, to put it mildly. And Ash Regan, we know that she
had quit the Scottish Government, didn't she, because she opposed its gender
reforms? Yes, that's right. She quit the Scottish Government over that issue, as
I say. And that's been another controversial issue. So it's interesting, Martha,
I mean, a lot of times we're talking about economics, about public services,
about independence, but we've spent a surprising amount of time in this campaign
so far discussing the cultural issues. And it's been interesting to see that
crossover. I suppose there's an interesting question about that, is does it
matter? And there's one poll out this morning, a poll of a thousand SNP
supporters. Now, a couple of caveats. It's not one of the biggest polling
companies. It is a thousand people, but it was conducted online. Nonetheless,
quite an interesting result because there's all the coverage. I'm looking at
some of the newspapers, you know, through the last few days have suggested that
Kate Forbes' campaign is in tatters, but it puts her in the lead. So we're still
at an early stage because the nominations haven't even closed yet. As you say,
that happens at lunchtime. Mr Youssef under some pressure himself because of a
critical report into the health service in Scotland that came out yesterday, and
particularly criticising his plan to try to fix some of the problems in the
health service. And Ms Regan, well, to be honest, she's much less known as a
candidate. So it'll be very interesting to hear some of her views this morning.
Interesting contest ahead, James. Thanks very much. British MPs worried about
the supply of some vegetables from abroad heard that the shortages could last
for up to a month. But the Environment Secretary told them the UK's food
security was still resilient. Here's our parliamentary correspondent, Susan
Hume. To earlier generations, a lettuce in February would have been a rare and
wondrous thing. Now we expect to, in fact we're told to eat a healthy
Mediterranean diet all year round. But supermarkets are struggling to get hold
of their usual supplies of tomatoes, peppers, cucumber and lettuce. Several
retailers are limiting how much of those shoppers can buy at any one time. The
Environment and Food Secretary, Therese Coffey, blamed unusually bad weather in
southern Spain and Morocco. But in her most calming tones, she insisted there
was no need to panic about salad. Industry has the capability, levers and
expertise to respond to disruption and where necessary my department will
further support and enable that. I wish to reiterate UK food security does
remain resilient and we continue to expect industry to be able to mitigate
supply problems through alternative sourcing options. Labour's shadow minister,
Jim McMahon, thought she sounded much too calm about it. Food security is
national security. This is absolutely mission critical. And frankly, I found
that response to be completely detached from the reality that's being faced on
the ground. He recognised there had been external factors, but he felt the
government had failed to pull the right levers to help farmers combat the
various food supply crises. We've had a billion fewer eggs like this year than
before the pandemic on our shelves. We literally have pancake day this week and
you couldn't buy eggs to make your pancakes. This is the result of indifference
and differing from government. Therese Coffey accused him of playing politics,
but the salad shortage isn't over yet. I'm led to believe by my officials after
discussion with industry and retailers, we anticipate the situation will last
about another two to four weeks. It's important that we try and make sure that
we get alternative sourcing options. Now Therese Coffey had said that other
European countries were also affected, but the SNP's Patricia Gibson didn't
believe it. The only European country with empty supermarket shelves. The
reality is that food shortages are due to low food production, which is in
serious decline under this government's watch. In addition, the supermarket
sector has been, and I quote, hurt horribly by Brexit, according to the chief
executive of Sainsbury's. A Conservative, Sir Desmond Swain, asked with heavy
irony. If only I had been told before I voted for Brexit that it was going to
cause frost in Morocco, I could have made a different decision, couldn't I?
Another Conservative, Sir Layne Saxby, thought we might be looking at this the
wrong way. Actually, the supermarkets are still importing far too many produce
for us and that actually we should be eating more seasonally and supporting our
own British farmers. And if we were actually to move to a seasonal line of
eating, many of these problems would be avoided and that there are great food
products available from local farmers at this time. Therese Coffey said it was
important to cherish British specialities and considered what we could be having
for dinner. A lot of people would be eating turnips right now rather than
thinking necessarily about aspects of lettuce and tomatoes and similar. But I'm
conscious that consumers want a year-round choice and that is what our
supermarkets and food producers and growers around the world try to satisfy.
Labour's Luke Pollard accused her of being complacent. It's 2023 and there are
crops rotting in the fields because there's not enough people to pick them.
There are kids going hungry in all our communities and now we have rationing in
our supermarkets. That is not because people are stockpiling and panic buying
salad, although you can't keep it out that long or the lettuce lasts longer than
the last Prime Minister. I do want the Secretary of State to have some more
grip. Therese Coffey thought it was ridiculous to complain that there was no one
out in British fields right now picking vegetables because there wasn't much
growing at this time of year. I'd love to hear about which farms in his
constituency are short right now of people being able to pick tomatoes or
lettuces because I have to say it's probably about as rare as... Unfortunately,
the Minister was struck by a supply issue with her metaphors. Alternative
sourcing options shouted out their suggestions. She rummaged round the mental
stock room. What's the best way of answering? I had a great one, Mr Speaker. I
don't know, gold at the end of the rainbow. Sometimes you just have to make do
with what you've got. As we're learning, Susan Hume, and you can hear more from
Yesterday in Parliament at half past eight on Longwave and on Digital. Our main
headline at 30 minutes to seven. Ukraine is marking the first anniversary of
Russia's full-scale invasion. In the UK, there'll be a minute's silence at 11
o'clock this morning. Of all the threats which have concentrated mines here and
in capitals around the world over the past year, the spectre of a nuclear strike
has been the most alarming. This week, the UN Secretary-General, Antonio
Guterres, warned again about implicit nuclear threats, a reference to warnings
which have come more than once from Russia's President Vladimir Putin. He's
spoken of being ready to use all options to defend Russia. And there's another
worry too, of a nuclear disaster, an accident, or an attack on Ukraine's nuclear
power stations, including the Zaporizhia power plant. It's Europe's largest, and
it was taken by Russian troops last March. And nuclear watchdogs are still
expressing concern. They did it this week, about a risk of a nuclear disaster,
either a deliberate attack, an accident, or a shortage of power supply to this
country's plants. I've been speaking to Ukraine's Minister for Energy, German
Galushenko, and I asked him how big a worry is it? Before this massive attacks
of the energy infrastructure, I was thinking that they won't attack directly the
nuclear stations in Ukraine. But I mean, after what they did with the Zaporizhia
NPP, when they captured the stations, so they shelled it by heavy tanks, by
artillery, and that is absolutely far from, I mean, the feeling of nuclear
safety. I'm not talking about even some international rules, convention,
everything is destroyed. But what we should expect from Russians, I really do
not have an answer now. So I hope that they won't shell our nuclear station. The
good thing is that we are in very close cooperation with the EIA and today with
Rafael Grossi. And here, I can tell you that we already provided the permanent
missions of EIA experts to all nuclear stations of Ukraine. I hope at least it
should stop them. I mean, to do something. So this is not a top worry at the
forefront of your mind? I hope. I mean, at least if they have any feeling of...
That's not the issue of Ukraine and Russia. I mean, if you attack the nuclear
station, that's not only the issue of two states, that is the issue of global
security. I mean, our neighbouring countries. So we understand what could be in
case of a nuclear accident, what could be with our neighbouring country, with
Europe, with Russia. And I hope that at least they still have some feeling about
consequences. But I cannot be 100% sure about this. It's been one year since
Russia invaded. We speak as the winter temperatures are dropping, your energy
reserves are dropping too. What is the main worry on the mind of Ukraine's
energy minister? I can tell you, so I quite, let's say, confident about the
reserves. I mean, when we are talking about the stocks of gas and the stocks of
coal in Ukraine, so we feel quite safe because it's even, I might say, that we
have reserves in case it's needed. But of course, the most dangerous issue is
the shellings, which unfortunately continue. And that's the issue of really what
would be the damage of these attacks. I mean, I'm not expecting they would stop
these attacks. But of course, I can tell you that the situation when we maintain
the system for more than four months, everyday attacks, I don't want to use the
word miracle. I mean, but it's not a miracle because that's the concrete people.
You know, we also have a lot of our energy staff who died at this war and died
repairing the energy infrastructure. That is Ukrainian heroic people in the
energy sector and I mean, as a nation, as Ukraine. As a last question, may I
just ask you, it's been one year and there is a concern that this seems to be a
war without end. What is your prediction for this year, this new year of war?
I'm not expecting one year of war. So I hope and I feel that the victory is not
far. This year? Yeah. Do you really have all the weapons you need, the advanced
weapons? I'm not an expert in weapons, but what I see, I mean, and let's say
that's my feeling and expectations about this, that we will win. Not far. Thank
you very much. Thank you. The time now is eight minutes to seven. Over the past
year, we've certainly seen the war fought fiercely on the ground, but the battle
for world opinion is equally contested. President Zelensky in battle fatigues,
addressing parliaments around Europe and President Putin trying to convince the
Russian public and the wider world that his mission is to defeat neo-Nazis in
Ukraine. We can talk now to James Rubin, former Assistant Secretary of State for
Public Affairs and now Special Envoy for the US State Department. Good morning.
Good morning to you. And part of your role is to lead Washington's effort to
counter propaganda and disinformation that threatens US security. And we've
certainly seen plenty of that, haven't we, in the context of the Ukrainian war?
Yes. From the beginning, I think there's been an information component to this
war, starting when President Putin and his team basically lied to the world
about their intentions. And then the United States did something unusual, which
is to really explain how we knew that Russia did intend to invade. And frankly,
as an American who's been on your show for many years, I am pleased to say that
that information turned out to be correct, unlike some information in the past
we used to talk about, and I think has done a lot to show the change in the
world's attitude towards the United States. We were able to tell the truth to
the world in advance and to debunk some of the expected lies coming from Moscow.
And I think, unfortunately, some of our allies and many people didn't really
think it was going to happen, but it did happen. And since that time, over this
year, there have been continued efforts by Russia, sometimes supported by China
and others, to misinform, disinform, manipulate international opinion. My
organization is called the Global Engagement Center that I lead. We put out a
report today called Disinformation Roulette, which lays out the things that
Russia has done over the last year to mislead and to manipulate international
opinion. Go ahead. Yeah, no, that's just interesting that you say sometimes
supported by China, because there's obviously a lot of interest in that
relationship at the moment, the suggestion that China may even be involved in
arming Russia. How do you see that relationship now? Well, that is pretty much
the big question of the day. We saw China's leading diplomat arrive in Moscow in
the last few days. He met with President Putin. And I think it's been a matter
of extreme concern to the president, to the secretary of state, that China has
been so supportive of Russia and its war, supportive diplomatically, supportive
politically, supportive economically. And particularly in the area that I work
on, China has repeated and over and over again, Russia's lies about this war.
They've repeated Russia's lies about the biological weapons claim, which was all
nonsense. They've repeated the most important thing that somehow the United
States wanted this war. The United States pushed this war. That's their false
claim. And I think it tells us a lot about what China's real policy is, the fact
that they would be so close to Russia right now. This is a Russia that has now
alienated the world. 140 nations voted against it. And China is supporting
Russia's war diplomatically, politically. Diplomatically, but militarily as
well? Do you think there is likely to be armed support from China? I'm not going
to speculate on what will happen. I think you know that President Biden, or I
can tell you that President Biden has raised this issue with China's president
on several occasions, warning him about the consequences for our relationship if
that were to happen. Secretary Blinken in the last several days has talked about
this, that there is evidence that they may be planning to do that. We are trying
our best to tell them the damage that that would do, not just to the
relationship with the United States. Let's face it, China's leaders have been on
a charm offensive in Europe for the last several months. And the fact is they
can't do two things. They can't claim to be for peace, and yet supporting the
aggressor in this war. And finally, looking at the options for the West and
offering more help to Ukraine, what do you think about the so-called backfill
options? In other words, that countries like Poland, which have former Russian
aircraft like MiGs, would give them to Ukraine, and then countries like Britain
would then backfill, as it were, supply other aircraft to Poland in its place?
Well, I don't want to predict exactly how the military assistance will get to
Ukraine. What I can tell you is that anyone who looks back in this one year
period, I think there's almost nobody around who would have predicted the extent
to which the United States and our allies have provided so many weapons,
including systems that a year ago, tanks that people thought we would never give
them. So coalition management is about keeping the coalition together and making
it possible to give greater and greater support to Ukraine. And that could
include air power, could it? Well, I don't want to predict that. I'm not the
Secretary of Defense. I don't want to be that. And that would really be in his
area. James Rubin, Special Envoy for the US State Department. Thank you for
joining us. And now it's time for the weather. Here's Sarah Keith-Lucas. Thank
you, Liz. Well, we've got a lot of dry weather on the cards as we see out the
final few days of February, a bit of a colder feel to the weather, certainly
over the next few days with a northerly breeze developing. Now, today, something
of a north-south split. So we'll start with the detail across all of Scotland,
Northern England and Northern Ireland. Well, we start this morning with a front
sitting across the region. So that's bringing some patchy rain to the Western
Isles, down towards Dumfries and Galloway, some of that patchy rain down towards
Northumberland, for instance, as well. As the cloud and rain just slowly sink
south through the morning, we'll see a return to sunnier skies during the
afternoon. Still a few showers around, particularly for eastern Scotland, one or
two for northeast England, and they could be a little bit wintry over the higher
ground, but some sunshine too, although it'll feel quite chilly, six or seven
degrees across the northern east of Scotland, perhaps 11 degrees a little
further south. Now, for the Midlands, Wales, eastern England and southern
England today, it is going to be quite a cloudy day, chilly first thing in the
far south, few spots of light patchy rain through the day, but a return to some
slightly brighter conditions later on this afternoon, and highs here of 8 to 11
degrees. Sarah, thank you. Radio 4's Lent Talks for 2023. Six reflective moments
taking inspiration from the Lord's Prayer, with meditations on forgiveness,
fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. A collection of personal stories, from
the man who forgave his brother's killers, to the writer escaping a war zone, to
facing despair but finding hope. Sharing experiences on faith, humanity and… We
are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third party
services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. I'll be
swapping tomatoes for turnips. I'll have to think of some turnip recipes, won't
we? You're listening to Today on BBC