TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-05-08H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 for the shamima begum story series 2 of i'm not a monster listen on bbc sounds
bbc news at seven o'clock on sunday the 5th of march good morning this is alan
smith more than 100 countries at the un have reached an agreement on the first
international deal to protect the high seas the prime minister has promised to
prevent migrants who arrive in the uk illegally from being able to stay leaked
messages suggest the former health secretary matt hancock wanted to use the
announcement of a new coronavirus variant just before christmas 2020 to frighten
people into following covid rules after 15 years of talks members of the un have
reached a landmark agreement to safeguard the world's oceans the treaty will
create protected areas covering 30 of the high seas or international waters by
the end of the decade more money will be spent on marine conservation and new
rules introduced for mining at sea as our climate reporter esme stallard
explains the announcement of a breakthrough came after a final 38 hour push at
the un in new york the ship has reached the shore it took almost two days of
back-to-back negotiations but countries from around the world from china to the
pacific island nation of palau finally came to an agreement on how to protect
the high seas these are the waters that sit beyond any country's jurisdiction
they cover two-thirds of the world's oceans and play host to most of our marine
life an estimated two million species until now all countries had a right to
fish ship and do research there this has left the animals and plants living in
the high seas at risk from threats including climate change overfishing and
shipping traffic now nations have agreed to set up marine protected areas to
limit these activities establish new protections against deep sea mining and set
up a framework for how any benefits from our oceans can be shared between rich
and poorer countries rishi sunak has said he's committed to ensuring that people
who come to the uk illegally are removed as the government prepares to unveil
new legislation this week to try to address the issue it's expected the plans
will include measures to block the asylum claims of anyone arriving in small
boats the home secretary suela braverman has suggested the british people are
sick of inadequate action on migrant crossings but charities say the proposals
are vindictive and extremely concerning our correspondent simon jones reports
the home secretary like her predecessors in the role is talking tough enough is
enough the british people want this solved she told the sun on sunday but suela
braverman is promising to tackle the crossings once and for all new legislation
is expected to place a duty on her to remove to rwanda or a safe third country
anyone who arrives on a small boat as soon as reasonably practicable the message
was reiterated by the prime minister who told the mail on sunday that people
coming to the uk illegally would not be allowed to stay but the pledge is not
straightforward no migrants have been sent to rwanda and plans to do so are
currently on hold facing legal challenges and there is no returns agreement in
place with the eu the charity freedom from torture said the proposals would do
nothing to reduce what it called the chaos and incompetence of the asylum system
the former health secretary matt hancock is facing claims he wanted to use scare
tactics to force people to comply with coronavirus lockdowns in the latest leak
of whatsapp messages from the sunday telegraph in one conversation he describes
how the announcement of a new variant of covid would frighten the pants off
everyone mr hancock has described the leaks as partial biased account to suit an
anti-lockdown agenda and believes there isn't a public interest case for
releasing the messages as they'd already been passed to the independent covid
inquiry here's our political correspondent helen catt the exchange published by
the sunday telegraph took place on the 13th of december 2020 by which date the
world health organization said that more than a thousand cases of the so-called
kent variant of the virus had been detected mr hancock and an aide are seen
discussing when to announce its existence the aid seems to suggest rolling the
pitch for a potential lockdown in london with the new variant mr hancock replies
we frighten the pants off everyone with the new strain the proportion of cases
in the capital linked to the variant had risen steeply in preceding weeks in a
separate exchange the following month the head of the civil service simon case
talks about a fear slash guilt factor as being vital in the government's
messaging the paper accuses mr hancock and his team of a kind of project fear a
former advisor to the health secretary responding to the publication of his own
messages told the bbc that promoting caution had been basic common sense china
has announced a reduced economic growth target of about five percent at the
start of its annual parliamentary session the economy grew by three percent last
year well under target the government has faced criticism for its strict covid
containment policies that affected large sections of business the gathering in
beijing is also being used by president xi jinping to further consolidate his
power by placing a range of loyalists into senior government roles regulated
rail fares will go up by 5.9 percent in england and wales their steepest rise
for more than a decade despite record poor reliability the increase will add
hundreds of pounds to the cost of many annual season tickets even though the
government says it's intervened to keep the rise below inflation here's our
transport correspondent katie austin the annual hike in rail fares is normally
pegged to the retail prices index measure of inflation the previous july which
stood at 12.3 percent this time around the government described the 5.9 cap on
price rises as a fair balance between passengers and the taxpayers who help pay
for services the cap applies to around 45 of fares including most season tickets
but the increase follows a period in which train cancellations have reached
record levels and there have been regular strikes on the railway anthony smith
from the watchdog transport focus said too many passengers were not getting a
value for money service a 15 year old is in hospital after being found with
serious stab wounds in manchester police believe the boy was injured outside a
mcdonald's restaurant in salford last night officers have been granted enhanced
stop and search powers and are appealing for witnesses the un's nuclear watchdog
has said meetings will take place very soon with iranian officials after tehran
agreed to give inspectors greater access to its nuclear sites the deal will
involve the installation of monitoring equipment such as surveillance cameras
there's been fresh international concern because of the discovery of uranium
enriched to near weapons grade level at an underground site iran denies trying
to make a nuclear bomb prince harry has described writing his autobiography
spare as an act of service saying that he hopes that sharing details of his life
and mental health will help others in a live streamed event with the therapist
dr gabo marte the prince discussed how using psychedelic medication had brought
him a sense of relaxation and release for me i started doing it recreationally
and then started to realize how good it was for me i would say that it is one of
the fundamental parts of my life that changed me and helped me deal with the
traumas and the pains of the past pubs clubs and bars in england and wales will
be allowed to stay open into the early hours over the coronation weekend
licensing laws are being relaxed between friday the 5th and sunday the 7th of
may tyler allen reports the home secretary suella braverman will lay an order in
parliament tomorrow to give venues permission to keep serving customers until
one o'clock in the morning over the coronation weekend she described the king's
coronation as a momentous occasion deserving of special celebration miss
braverman said she wanted people to be able to enjoy an extra pint or two with
family and friends as they wished his majesty a long and happy reign the move
had the backing of more than three quarters of the members of the public who
responded to a month-long consultation the british beer and pub association has
welcomed the decision saying it offered the industry a timely boost in the
middle of an acutely challenging period that's the news now let's take a look at
the morning papers and the mail on sunday puts rishi sunak's pledge on illegal
channel migrants on its front page inside it says the new measures will
challenge what it calls the shocking misuse of asylum by people coming here
through countries which are safe the paper reports that the new pledge has
followed months of white hall discussions about whether britain could leave the
european convention on human rights which provides the legal authority for most
deportation challenges mr sunak the paper says has concluded the key part of the
convention could be circumvented instead he's gone full trump is the observer's
main headline the paper says support for boris johnson among senior tories is
draining away over his response to an interim report which suggested there was
significant evidence he did mislead mps over partygate it reports that several
conservative grandees reacted with disbelief as mr johnson questioned the work
of a cross-party commons committee investigating the issue allies of the former
prime minister accused the committee of staging a political show trial according
to the sunday times thousands of ukrainian children have been abducted and taken
to russia or crimea during the last year it says a yale university study
estimated more than 6 000 children between four months and 17 years old were
being held in various camps across russia ukrainian officials insist the figure
is much higher and the observer covers the return of the veteran presenter sir
david attenborough on the front in front of the camera in a new bbc wildlife
series next week at the age of 96 the paper says that it understands that the
show on british natural history wild isles will be the last time viewers will
see him filmed on location although his spokesperson insisted he was definitely
not stepping down and that's our look at the sunday papers with alan smith
thanks alan now on radio 4 it's time for sunday with william crawley thanks very
much good morning it has been a potentially historic week for northern ireland
as rishi sunak revealed his new windsor framework in an effort to restore
government there and reset the peace process church leaders are also in the
business of reconciliation so we'll ask the catholic bishop of derry and the
presbyterian moderator for their assessment we'll also visit lambeth palace as
the church of england opens its archives to present damning evidence of its own
complicitness in the atlantic slave trade people were prepared to literally
desecrate their faith to literally tear up the holy book in order to justify
enslaving other people and we try to untangle the sometimes fractious
relationship between religion and science your emails this morning to sunday at
bbc.co.uk we're on twitter at bbcr for sunday it'll be a month tomorrow since
earthquakes wrought devastation in regions of southern turkey and northern syria
the death toll in both countries has now passed 50 000 among the uk charities
still involved in relief efforts in turkey is islamic relief salaah abu gasem
leads the charities work there it's been really really difficult for everyone
involved people are very much and unfortunately physically and mentally and
emotionally drained there's been a a monumentous effort from many of the
agencies we've been working around the clock tirelessly and our plans now have
to develop and they have to change we're still conducting some of the the
emergency sort of activities which include the provision of food for people the
provision of hygiene but now it's moved more to the recovery the reconstruction
even today just a few hours ago we're making some of the plans for some of the
medium to longer term shelter provisions that we're going to be providing for
people and we're calling them dignity shelters i wouldn't say it's a home it's
more a case of something for the medium term for the next couple of years we'll
never be able to give them back what they've lost but we want people to at least
have that feeling that we're on the track to recovery give us a sense of how
things are playing out differently in syria there is a generation of children
that we're consistently trying to bring to people's attention that have not had
education that have suffered trauma after trauma you know i'm still meeting
children with day in day out now who are talking about the fact that when the
earthquake hit and by the way there was there's still been multiple tremors and
when an earthquake hits the normalization of a child to not react to an
earthquake because you think it's an airstrike and i'm talking to children who
are saying members of our family died we didn't react because we were so used to
so used to having our home you know shaking that we didn't move so we need to
understand as an international community that a generation is being lost without
education with psychological damage with knowing nothing about war and suffering
and now an earthquake all of them are too much one of the programs that programs
that we're doing is our psychosocial support we have to look at the provision
for children how to try to put smiles back on their faces those who've lost
parents working with the authorities to provide them support that they need in
order to get back into a sort of familiar and family setting you know it was
nice a couple of days ago to be among some of the children and just sit talk to
them play games and activities with them try to you know we'd never be able to
appreciate what they've been through we can't comprehend it but we have to also
understand that we want people as quickly as possible to go back to some form of
normality and we have to work with everyone who's in need but especially focus
on the children. Salah what is the situation where you are now in the town of
Nurdegi which was hit very very badly in the earthquake? It was now it's very
much it's very different there is a somber mood and the somber mood and feeling
is all centered around the fact that there's been so much loss there's been so
much suffering this was very close to the epicenter and one of the towns that
was so badly affected in this town unfortunately now the conversation and the
discussion locally here with with a lot of the coordinating authorities is about
the potentiality of actually completely knocking this town down and that just
shows you the scale of what happened here. Much of that population have gone
into tents some have moved to neighboring sort of host communities that have
taken them on there's been a great community effort of those helping others but
it's challenging it's challenging for everyone. Salah Abulgasem from Islamic
Relief. There were clashes between police and protesters in Tel Aviv this week
as thousands took to the streets to oppose the government's plans to limit the
role of the country's supreme court. Protesters see that as a par grab by the
most right-wing government the country has had in decades and that political
shift has put the country's growing ultra-orthodox Haredi community at odds with
more liberal sections of Judaism. Why? Because they essentially disagree about
the version of Judaism that should shape the future of the world's only
constitutionally Jewish state. As efforts are made to maintain peace we bring
you now a rare conversation between two rabbis with very different ambitions for
the future of their country. Ultra-orthodox rabbi Yoshua Pfeffer and reform
rabbi Nahma Kelman the first female rabbi ordained in Israel. I think a lot of
our arguments or our differences stem from who interprets and who has the
authority to interpret. Now I believe that women should have the right if they
want to serve in the air force to serve in the air force and when the supreme
court ruled in their favor does that fly in the face of Jewish values of Jewish
life? You might think so, I don't think so. You know one has to be able to
understand both sides of the argument and if we see such a large population in
Israel that is in favor in strong favor of these reforms there's something
underlying that. I think it's important to... What's underlying it? It's we're
split in half at the moment. Right. Okay we're split in half. I'm not sure
everybody voted for the current government voted for all the reforms. I think a
lot of us don't understand what the reforms mean. What would you like? What's
your ideal Jewish state? That I will live orthodox values? That I will live an
orthodox Jewish life? Is that your ideal Jewish state? Of course certainly but
not one that that you'll be coerced to do that that you'll choose to. Oh one
minute let me get to that. It's your choice. Well then who's going to guarantee
my choice? Who is going to guarantee my choice when there's a government that
will rule by one vote or three votes that for example public funds will be used
to support x? I will now have to ride on public buses that will separate men and
women if we're going to live an orthodox. I'm exaggerating but these are what
will guarantee my rights in this country? The understanding of any democracy is
that your rights are guaranteed by the democratic process. That's first of all.
Meaning if we're in a country that's ruled by a majority rule which is at the
end of the day the foundation of a democracy. One of the foundations. Then
correct. Well that ought to be the best guarantee of a person's right. Now
you're right that sometimes supreme court needs to intervene and no one who is
arguing in favor of the reform is saying that there shouldn't be any
intervention of the supreme court. Of course there should be. The question is a
question of proportion. Now what kind of reforms do we need? I think that should
be a good conversation. We need to speak to one another and we need to reach
compromise. However I do think it's very important to keep in mind the
following. As the population of Israel changes it stands to reason that
different arrangements in Israel also should be in flux. They need to be
dynamic. Now while dynamic I agree we don't want anyone to be coerced in any
way. But the lack the absence of coercion doesn't mean that we're in a static
model that shouldn't be in flux and changing with the change of demographic.
That at the end of the day is a democratic society. So there's an assumption of
Israel as a Jewish state. How does the Jewishness of Israel look? Well it
depends on the people. If in this discussion I would know that the ultra-
orthodox or the orthodox world would allow me to function then there's something
to talk about. If you're going to come back and tell me all the time well
demographically we're winning. And by the way as a Jew as a Jew I believe it's a
miracle what's happened in the ultra-orthodox world. It's a demographic miracle.
It's a political nightmare for me but it's a Jewish demographic miracle of the
replacement. Okay? But I think but that doesn't mean you wield this kind of
power without any checks and balances because again show me where ultra-orthodox
rabbis will sit down and talk to people the likes of me. So first of all I want
to agree strongly it is a demographic miracle and not just the Haredim. Israel
is a demographic miracle. The secular birth rate in Israel is far above any
other country in the OECD. It's true that the Haredim might be the spearhead of
that miracle. I've made my modest contribution. We have eight kids but we're
just average for a Haredi community and that I agree with you. I also agree with
you. Well you know what let me take your argument a step further and say I think
it's up to us people in in my camp in a religious camp to actually get together
and think what do we want? How do we envisage a state of Israel where we get to
call the shots given the fact that there's a majority of people who are not
observant Jews who do not perform all of the mitzvot in an observant orthodox
Haredi whichever way and I think that the absence of that actually does cause a
lot of anxiety a lot of concern. I think we need to do better on that no
question. Rabbi Joshua Pfeffer in dialogue there with Rabbi Namar Kelman and you
can hear their full conversation in the documentary Two Rabbis Worlds Apart on
Heart and Soul on BBC Sounds. We are living through a golden age of audio from
radio to podcasting to audiobooks but as every fan of audiobooks will tell you
the voice of the narrator is often of make or break importance. Could that be
true at a deeper level of the Bible too? What if the narrator is a woman or has
anything but a posh accent? Might that affect a reader's attitude to the text
itself? A new audiobook voiced solely by women is being launched on
International Women's Day this Wednesday. My faith is important to me because
it's changed my whole life you know in the acting profession you have so many
times where you're just relying on God because it's so unpredictable. When he
saw Jesus he fell with his face to the ground and begged him, Lord if you are
willing you can make me clean. My faith is important to me because with Jesus I
feel as if I have a friend constantly by my side and just that confidence of
knowing I'm never alone in life. I know who you are the Holy One of God be quiet
said Jesus Stanley come out of him the impure spirit shook the men violently and
came out of him with a shriek. Some of the narrators reading through the New
Testament in Her Audiobible UK. It's the brainchild of the Reverend Katie
Partridge who joins us now. Good morning Katie. Good morning. There are of
course many audio versions of the Bible out there. What was your ambition with
this one? So as you said that this is the first NIV audiobible voiced fully by
women from across the UK and these are not celebrity voices these are women with
a wide range of accents and backgrounds as you just heard. That was the lovely
Paxi and Bryony and the heart of the project is that we seek to represent
something of the diversity of women across the UK and to give those women a
voice. You've just mentioned the NIV there the New International Version of the
Bible. Why did you select that version rather than some other version? There are
other versions of course and some are often regarded as more gender inclusive.
That is true. We chose the NIV because it's the most familiar text probably.
It's called the Pew Bible isn't it and it's the one that sticks most in our
minds probably generationally and also it's fairly inclusive so it's called an
evergreen translation. There's a very rigorous translation process and it's a
continuous translation process. So yeah we have the 2011 version now but they
will continue to check and to re-review their translations and it is fairly
inclusive. So for example a more traditional text in Mark 4 would say for to him
who has more will be given and from him who has not even what he has will be
taken away. That's quite a male normative language but the NIV says whoever has
will be given more whoever does not have even what they have will be taken from
them. So you can see that there is fairly inclusive language. Katie I know
you've said that you want to challenge patriarchal structures with this project
as well. Male domination that excludes the voices of women historically. How do
you think an audiobook can contribute to that? I think that the repercussions of
women not being in leadership in the church and it's only been 25 years that
women have been ordained in the Church of England so comparatively not very
long. I think that the repercussions of that exclusion and leadership just
ripples down doesn't it into every other sphere whether it's the books being
written by women on the shelves of theological colleges or whether it's in the
more technological resources that we have. So there are even now between 700 and
800 audio bibles across the world only eight voiced fully by women. It's
interesting isn't it. The impact of hearing the Bible in a particular voice is
in itself an interesting question isn't it. Whether it's the voice of a woman or
the voice of a refugee or the voice of someone with a discernibly working class
accent rather than a posh English accent that kind of thing. How do you think
hearing the Bible in the voice of a woman can affect a cultural change? Good
question. I think the cultural change has happened in the New Testament. When
Jesus came he spoke to women, he liberated women, he had women disciples and
somehow that's got a bit lost in translation and particularly the audio bibles
that we have so far. The Bible is for everyone and so we want everyone to feel
included in the text to have a voice that sounds like them. Reading the words of
the Bible is extremely powerful and validating. You're making your way through
just briefly you're making your way through the New Testament. Are you going to
do the Old Testament as well? Yes, yes. It's a big project. Say that again. It's
a big project. It is a big project yes. So we're launching with the New
Testament starting with the Gospels and Revelation and then next year we will
begin to record the Old Testament so watch this space. Thank you very much
Katie, the Reverend Katie Partridge from Her Audio Bible UK. In January we
reported that the Church of England was creating a £100 million fund to address
past wrongs after acknowledging that it had profited from investments connected
to the slave trade. An exhibition at Lambeth Palace is showcasing artefacts that
reveal those historical connections. It's called Enslavement Voices from the
Archives. Vishwa Samani has been there to see it for us. This Bible that you can
see in front of you, where a usual Bible contains over a thousand chapters, this
Bible contains only over 200. That's Georgia Boone from the Church Commissioners
for England showing me a Bible on display designed for slaves. 90% of the Old
Testament has been removed, 50% of the New Testament has been removed. Now there
was a big debate in the church about baptism of enslaved people and access to
scripture. This Bible was seen as a solution to that. It removed content that
might speak to ideas of empowerment and I think this is the thing that shocks
people the most, that people were prepared to literally desecrate their faith,
to literally tear up the Holy Book in order to justify enslaving other people.
The Slave Bible is among select items that have been here in the National
Library and Archive of the Anglican Church for years, now in full view, in some
cases for the first time. The objects evidence how the church's current £10.1
billion investment fund can be partly traced to an earlier fund called Queen
Anne's Bounty that invested in the slave trade. Just over here is a map of the
South Sea Company. Can you explain the significance of this? The South Sea
Company was a company that shipped slaves across the world and what we did find
was that the Queen Anne's Bounty existed to make provision for poor clergy.
Around a third of that was invested in the transatlantic chattel slave trade via
an investment in the South Sea's Company. The exhibition also features early
18th century financial accounts that list prominent slave trader Edward Colston
as a benefactor and there are letters written by enslaved people to archbishops
with pleas for freedom. The Anglican plantation had its own bespoke brand. There
was nothing that was done in this ungodly land. Inspired by one such letter,
Desiree Baptiste, a writer and researcher, has written the monologue, Incidents
in the Life of an Anglican Slave, which she'll be performing at Lambeth Palace
Library. The letter itself is obviously a plea to a high authority in the Church
of England for help but I wanted to go further than that. I didn't want it just
to be somebody who's pleading for help but somebody who's actually engaging in
resistance throughout their entire life, somebody with agency, somebody with a
full personality and that's so important because that's what was stolen from the
enslaved. They weren't allowed to be individuals. At Codrington what I came to
find really nearly blew my mind. I'd never seen a thing so thoroughly unkind.
The work was punishingly back-breaking, not to mention more back-whipping if you
slacked. Desiree thinks the exhibition's a good first step but says there are
gaps in how the church has presented its history. The glaring omission for her
is the absence of any mention of Codrington a slave plantation in Barbados once
run by the missionary arm of the Anglican Church. Codrington had an unusually
high death rate among enslaved people, huge infant and child mortality rates and
this was a plantation that was basically an Anglican run and owned plantation.
There is material on the Codrington estate at Lambeth Palace Library including
an extremely important letter alerting the Anglican Church leadership to torture
on the Codrington estate. So this cabinet presents arguments for and against
slavery. What do you make of this? Well I think it's a reconstruction of what is
a very complex history. Professor Robert Beckford who for years has been working
to address injustice in African and diaspora communities is also paying close
attention to how the church is laying bare its historical links with slavery.
This could have been done before it could have been done in 2007 when church
groups particularly black church groups were asking the church to open up their
archives. He agrees with writer Desiree that the Codrington estate should be in
this exhibition and describes displays showcasing early abolitionist views from
within the church as problematic. There has been a failure to reckon with the
suffering that was caused as a consequence of this history not just by the
church but by British society as a whole. There's often a quick switch to
abolition rather than dealing with the suffering. They've kind of missed out the
Easter Sunday suffering of black people and jumped straight into the
abolitionist Easter Monday and celebration of what the church did to get out of
slavery. I think that enslaved Africans who were trafficked and brutalized would
not see their history as being one which represents arguments for and against
their enslavement. Rather than opening up a more complex space for discussion
and healing it actually leads to more frustration and agitation. Those who
manage the Church of England's investment fund say no amount of money can put
right what was so obviously wrong and so this exhibition paid for by Lambeth
Palace and separate to a 100 million pound fund announced in January for
communities affected by slavery is part of a process of confronting a complex
history for the church. But Bishop David Urquhart from the Church Commissioners
for England believes there is a place for abolitionist views in it. I think it's
really interesting for us in the 21st century to observe what people of passion
and vision and justice did to change the power structure in the 18th century and
so abolitionists committed their lives in their own lights to make a change. The
abolitionists did have a major part to play. The Codrington plantation and many
other involvements of church in slavery and plantations are available in all
sorts of archives and diversities across England so that's something which will
come ahead of us in the future and is part of this much wider development of
what we're hoping to achieve in the response. One of the most important things
that we've discovered on our journey is that we have lots to learn. There's an
enormous amount of re-understanding, re-thinking of who we are and what we've
done and what we might do better in the future. Report that report from Vishwa
Samani and the exhibition Enslavement Voices from the Archives runs until the
4th of April at Lambeth Palace Library. Desiree Baptiste incidentally will be
performing a staged reading of incidents in the life of an Anglican slave based
on one of the letters in the exhibition on the 15th of March. It's 27 minutes to
eight, still to come this morning, what happened when a man turned up at a
mosque in the United States with a plan to bomb it. I remember when he came to
the centre one day he told my husband he wants to convert. People were even more
scared after he converted. As achievements go having an asteroid named after
yourself must be up there, if you'll excuse the pun. Pope Gregory XIII, who
famously gave us the Gregorian calendar, now gains that accolade courtesy of the
International Astronomical Union and there are more than 30 Jesuit astronomers
who've also had asteroids named in their honour, which is a celestial hint, is
it not, that the relationship between science and religion may be more
complicated than some imagine. That story is told in a new book with the
intriguing title Magisteria, the entangled histories of science and religion by
Nicholas Spencer. Nick, good morning, welcome. Good morning. Fairly briefly if
you could, first of all, Magisteria, why that title? Well I nicked it really,
it's from the American biologist Stephen Jay Gould who wrote a book 25 years ago
arguing that science and religion were non-overlapping Magisteria. He actually
nicked it from the Catholic Church in all fairness, but Magisteria basically
means area or area of expertise. Science is one, religion is another. Gould
argued that they weren't overlapping, I argue that they do. When people think of
the perceived war between these two realms, these two Magisteria, religion and
science, they often point to particular examples. Think of the persecution, for
example, of Galileo. As briefly as you can, why do you argue that this is a much
more complicated story than the simple church versus science conflict? Well
there's so much more going on. I mean no one denies there was a significant
conflict between the Catholic Church and Galileo in the early 17th century, but
science and religion didn't exist in the forms that we know them then. There
were conflicts about philosophy, about the state of Aristotelian philosophy
which was absolutely central to the time in which Galileo's work and the work of
other natural philosophers challenged. There were theological or religious
conflicts. The papacy was terrified of, as it were, new reformations bubbling
up. There was a personal element there. Galileo didn't help his case by mocking
the Pope at the time in one of his publications under the figure of a man called
Simpleton, which rather upset the Pope who had been his close friend beforehand.
Somebody once said of Galileo, he'd rather lose a friend than an argument. So
there was a conflict going on there, but Galileo was a very devout Catholic
himself and he, like many people at the time, were entirely convinced that the
new science could be married with a Catholic faith. There were just so many
things going on under the surface that the myth doesn't capture. There are
nevertheless moments of conflict, for sure, between church and science
historically, right? Oh, there really are. And what I'm not doing in the book
is, as it were, going from one side of the road right to the other side of the
road. I'm not trying to argue, well, actually it was all harmony in Eden or
through three, four hundred years or so. There have been points of tension.
There have been points of real conflict. Ironically, those points have been
quite profitable, quite fruitful. Conflict isn't something we should be
necessarily scared of. The worst times in the history were actually moments of
concord when, if you like, religion built itself entirely on scientific
foundations. The science moved on, as science always does, and the religious
edifice came toppling down. Where do you see continuing claims of a conflict
between science and religion in our world? Well, the book argues that there were
two kind of really interesting tension points here. One is about humanity. How
do we understand the human? One is about authority. Who gets the right to say?
And that was why in the 19th century there were real kind of tensions, because
that was the time when science became professionalised, and the word scientist
was coined. You went to the beginning of the 19th century, a scientist would
probably be an Anglican cleric in his rectory. By the end, it's a professional
body of people working in universities and industry. Now, that conflict's gone.
Science has its very clear authoritative institutions and structures and so on
and so forth. But the question of humanity remains, and I argue towards the end
of the book that actually, as we move into an area of genetic engineering, to
artificial intelligence, and to attempts for scientific immortality, the
question of what is a human, who is a human, and how do we value the human are
actually going to become more important rather than less. And so there's a lot
more to this conversation to be heard. And I suppose the realm in which you, the
arena in which you pose those questions, who am I? What is my place in the
universe? What is the future of humanity can often determine the outcome? Yeah,
it really can. I mean, you know, sometimes we said we don't want the rest of the
future of humanity to be decided by a bunch of techno-utopians in Silicon
Valley. And that's a bit of a kind of a tongue-in-cheek way of putting it. But
broadly speaking, most people recognise that you need to ground scientific
development, technological development, and wider ethical thinking. That's
absolutely right. But the key question of ethical thinking, what is the good,
depends on the kind of creatures whose good you are trying to serve. So if you
like, ethics draws you in towards more philosophical conceptions of the human,
anthropology, technically speaking. This has been absolutely central to science
and religion discussion for so long, which is why it isn't just history, really,
this is almost equipping us to navigate through what are going to become quite
choppy waters in the 21st century, I think. Nick, thank you very much. Nicholas
Spencer, the author of Magisteria. An extraordinary account of religious and
personal transformation is up for an Oscar next weekend. Stranger at the Gate is
nominated in the documentary short category. It tells the story of a former US
Marine, Richard Mack McKinney, who goes to a mosque in the town of Muncie in
Indiana with a deadly intent. And I warned you, some may find his description of
that moment from the film pretty disturbing. My plan was to detonate an IED
right outside the Muncie Islamic Centre on a Friday afternoon when they were all
gathered and I was hoping for at least 200 or more dead, injured. At least that
was my goal, 200 or more. A clip there from Stranger at the Gate, directed by
Joshua Seftel with cinematography by Carl Schroeder. But what happens next to
Mack McKinney is truly astonishing. He meets some of the Muslim community in
that mosque and the care, the support, the friendship they offer him changes his
life. Mack McKinney would eventually become president of the Islamic Centre he
had planned to bomb. One of those who helped inspire that change in him is Bibi
Barami, the Centre's co-founder. She recalled for me how she first discovered
Mack's original very sinister plans. It was not too long after I met him and he
was keep coming to the Centre, you know, and some of the brother, the African-
American brother who was coming regularly, they had more encounter with him too
and kind of communicated with him. And then some of the community members got
suspicious and I was receiving calls that, you know, who is this guy? He looks
scary and concerned. Before we knew about what his plan was, people were
concerned, like, you know, he looks different or suspicious. And then that
rumour got into the bigger picture, like, oh, he has a plan and that's why he is
doing the bomb, the rumour got bigger. Then that was the time I invited him over
to our house and some of the members in the Islamic Centre who had a greater
concern, I invited them also. And after dinner, when I came and sat down, I
basically just asked him straight forward from my sincere heart, like, Mack,
this is what I have heard. Is this true? And he put kind of his head down and
embarrassed and he looked up to me like it took him a minute to breath that,
yes, this is truth. That's when I found out for sure. You know, sometimes you
hear rumours, sometimes you hear things. I was impressed with his sincere
answer, even though it's a hateful situation. But he did not hide it. And he
said it in front of everybody. So we had time for conversation and we talked
about it and just to understand truly what his plan was. It's an interesting
dynamic, Bibi, isn't it? Because he goes to this community, your community, with
a hateful intent. He wants to bomb this community. And then he encounters love
and concern and friendship there. I just wonder, given that your community fully
accepted him and brought him right into the centre of the community, I assume
that was a difficult enough journey for some within the community. That's true.
Especially, why wouldn't it be difficult for the people who are minority, who
have been attacked from different directions, Islamophobia, all kinds of name
calling. And even like I remember my son was calling them that you're Bin
Laden's nephew or who are you, what are you doing here on the bus? Four-year-old
kid was on the bus going to school. And especially after 9-11, what has been
happening, the people have the right to be scared. And when I told him, I think
what helped was getting him that invitation help, obviously, step by step. And
then not only that, when he even converted, I think it took him around two
months, he was ready to come to the religion, which that's his own decision. And
we had nothing to do with it. I remember when he came to the centre one day, he
told my husband he wants to convert. He said, Mac, you're come on, just get
ready and study more. This is maybe you're not ready at this point. But he was
like laughing and looking at him weird, like, what do you mean I'm ready? But
anyway, when he came to Islam, people were still very concerned. Yes. He will
come to the dinner. He wants to know us. People were even more scared after he
converted. Yes. Was he trying to infiltrate the community in order to carry out
an even bigger attack? Exactly. And then what I did, inviting him to the monthly
dinner, mentoring him and giving him responsibility. I met him in one of the
class we had, Centre for the Peace and Conflict Study. I took that class. He was
taking the same class. I said, oh, brother Mac, we need a president for MSA. He
said, Sister Bibi, how can I do that? I said, you can do that, brother. I will
help you. Just giving him that leadership, that respect again and getting him
involved. That's what helped the community, giving him involved and making him
part of us. The rest of the community got so comfortable with him. What about
the wider community in your city in Muncie? How did they react when they heard
this remarkable story, incredible story of the domestic terrorist who ends up
converting to Islam and eventually even becomes president of the Islamic Centre
there in Muncie? I think people have developed, even the larger community, that
respect that, wow, this man, nobody even was looking at him. And for the Muslim
community or for the larger community to have a better understanding, to share
his vision and to make other people understand the better side of that. And now
your film, this story, extraordinary, nominated for an Oscar. Yes, it is
nominated for Oscar. I have flown two times this last week to Los Angeles for
screening and be part of this amazing message for humanity. Bibi Barami and on
Monday's Women's Hour, you can hear Malala Yousafzai, executive producer of
Stranger at the Gate, telling Nuala about why she got involved in the project.
If Stranger at the Gate is a kind of reconciliation miracle story, we are just
weeks away from the 25th anniversary of what was widely regarded as a political
miracle story, the Good Friday Agreement of 1998. It was always naive to assume
that Northern Ireland's journey beyond that agreement would be an easy one. You
don't need to look much further than the empty seats in the Stormont Assembly at
present for evidence of that. This week, Rishi Sunak went to Belfast to make the
case for his new deal with the European Union that's supposed to fix the
problems of the Northern Ireland Protocol, the post-Brexit trading arrangements
aimed at avoiding a hard border on the island of Ireland. But so far, the DUP,
the Democratic Unionist Party, whose support is crucial to restoring the power-
sharing government in Northern Ireland, have yet to deliver their verdict on the
deal. At the end of a potentially historic week in Northern Ireland, we are
joined by the Presbyterian moderator, Dr John Kirkpatrick, and the Catholic
Bishop of Derry, Donal McEwan. Welcome to both of you. Good morning. Morning,
William. Morning, John. But Bishop Donal, can I ask you first of all, I mean,
neither of you is a politician, obviously, let's just state that, but you're
civic leaders, you're faith leaders, you're moral leaders. Do you believe that
church leaders have something to say at this precise moment, can contribute to
bringing some kind of healing here? I think we should say, William, this is
certainly a political problem created by the political Good Friday Agreement,
Brexit and so on. So ultimately, it's up to politicians to resolve the problems
that they have created, because all our structures are here at the service of
the people. I think our job is, as church leaders, to model good relationships
between ourselves, to keep encouraging our politicians to believe that if we got
through the Good Friday Agreement 25 years ago, we can solve this problem as
well. And moderator, that does bring us to a kind of perspective on the
agreement that's been proposed, which is an attempt to deal with the problems of
the protocol, particularly in the minds of the DUP. Can I ask, John, do you
agree with the DUP that Northern Ireland's place in the UK has been diminished
by the Northern Ireland Protocol trade arrangements because EU law after Brexit
continues to apply in Northern Ireland? Well, I think that's a fair point. I
think that going back to the Good Friday Agreement, it seems to me there were
those three strands, the strands that were co-operation North-South, co-
operation East-West, there was power sharing within Northern Ireland, and then
Brexit affects all three in a sense. The Brexit challenged the nationalist
community and the Irish, and now the protocol has really challenged the East-
West to some degree within the Northern Ireland Unionism. So that's partly how
their sense of being, that sense of nervousness with that, is understandable.
And, you know, there's a sense in which I think that, you know, the whole Good
Friday Agreement, the analogy for me is like that of the marriage. It was a bit
like that was the Good Friday was sort of like where the values were made to
each other. And that should have established a sort of a safe place for people
to move forward where there's a sense of trust and a sense where, you know,
progress can be made. And I think what's happened really is that over the last
25 years, we haven't really done the hard work of the peace building, you know,
the gestures of grace, the work, the thanks, the affirmation. So in a sense,
it's brought us to a place again, maybe like a reminder, it's a waking up and
saying, well, this process has still got quite a bit to go. And maybe we need to
invest a little bit more and not just simply be on the sidelines looking and
watching and observing, but, you know, more involved in it. Bishop Donald, do
you have any sympathy for the DUP's position that the careful equilibrium, as
John's just been saying, constructed in the Good Friday Agreement to give equal
protection to the two main communities in Northern Ireland, that carefully put
together equilibrium has been unbalanced by the Northern Ireland Protocol? Well,
I think certainly the problem goes back to Brexit has caused the problem. We had
a reasonably workable system in place and Brexit has brought in new arrangements
there to destabilise that. And I think, yes, you're correct. We're facing that
reality and trying to live with it. I suppose the whole question of
reconciliation within Northern Ireland is an interesting question because the
Good Friday Agreement was based on the assumption, I think, that the centre
would coalesce. But the problem is that Northern Ireland's problem was never a
theological one. It was always primarily about national identity, not how we
live in Northern Ireland, but where Northern Ireland would belong in 10 years.
So in some ways, despite the Good Friday Agreement, the war's over, but the
conflict on the political terms is still alive and well. So this has really
destabilised that and caused a lot of uncertainty. And I can certainly
understand fear and worries. On the other hand, politicians are there to serve
the common good. We need people in place to look after our hospitals, our
schools. We could employ 500 nurses and teachers instead of paying our MLAs and
their staff for a year in storm. And I think we have to ensure that politics is
shown to work in Northern Ireland. Otherwise, we don't have a future. John, you
said a minute ago, essentially, that the peace process after the Good Friday
Agreement was kind of taken for granted rather than nurtured. I want to ask you
both just on the back of that. Give me your sense of where the reconciliation
journey since 1998 has brought Northern Ireland. Well, I think that there
certainly has been a lot of a new sense of working together for various groups
of people. I think that a lot of people felt, if the word is permission or the
safe place, now that they start to build. And that has happened. I certainly
have seen it within the churches. Churches have been trying to model working
together for the common good with respect. And I think it's worked in business.
I think it always was there in business, but I think it's maybe more so. It's
been working in education. And just about three weeks ago, I shared a visit with
some of the other church leaders on to the Falls Road and the Shankill Road. And
they have been working, individuals within churches and community there, on
relational building at a small level. But those are all things, I think, that
grow out of this sense of peacefulness. No longer are we having that sort of
threatening sort of environment around us. So people feel they're a wee bit more
empowered to reach out to one another. And I find that is really encouraging.
And that's still going on. If I can just leave a quote that I think is really,
really helpful from Alan Patten. I'm sure you're familiar with his cry, The
Beloved Land. But he said one thing I thought was really, really helpful. He
said, there's only one thing that has power completely, and that is love.
Because when a man loves, he seeks no power, and therefore he has power. And I
think that Jesus Christ has really demonstrated that above anyone else. And
those of us who follow him, I think we are trying to encourage that spirit in
our communities. And I think I have witnessed it, and I think we maybe need to
do a little bit more. I think that's where we're at at this point in the
journey. And I certainly agree with Donald, what he has been saying there, that
that's what we want to do. Moderator, thank you very much. Dr. John Kirkpatrick
and the Bishop of Derry, Donald McKeown. That is it for this week's Sunday. You
can of course, listen again, or download the programme as a podcast from the BBC
Sounds app. And you can follow us too. Please say hello, in fact, on Twitter at
BBC Sunday. Next week, Edward Sturton is in the chair for a very special edition
of Sunday, marking the 10th anniversary of Pope Francis's pontificate that is
live from Rome. Enjoy the rest of your weekend. Sunday was produced by Jill
Collins and Bara'atu Ibrahim. The studio managers were Sue Stonestreet and John
Cole. This is BBC Radio 4. Now, Adjoa Andoh makes the Radio 4 appeal on behalf
of Freedom From Torture. The stories coming out of Iran in recent months have
left many of us horrified. People beaten and arrested, young women tortured and
killed. Across the world, people are tortured with sickening regularity. They
are doctors, farmers, teachers, campaigners, housewives, students and
journalists. They are ordinary people, like me and you. Freedom From Torture is
a UK charity supporting survivors of torture who have made it here to safety,
working with them to recover and rebuild their lives. Every year, hundreds of
survivors transform their lives with the charity's help, and I am proud to
support their work. When the Iranian secret police arrested Nazrin in 1982, she
was just 23, her crime, campaigning for better human rights. For eight years,
she was imprisoned and tortured. Her beatings were so severe they resulted in
temporary paralysis of her legs and a brain tumour from her head having been
smashed against a wall. When torture survivors are finally released, as Nazrin
was, or managed to escape, they are in desperate need of help. Freedom From
Torture can offer that help, but only with our support. Thanks to specialist
therapy, torture survivors like Nazrin can overcome their flashbacks, their
suicidal thoughts, begin to process their trauma, and slowly recover from their
terrifying experiences. Group activities allow survivors to meet others who have
suffered similar abuse. It lets them know they are not alone, that they are
welcome and safe here in the UK, but only half of all those referred are
currently able to get the help they need. A donation of £61 today could fund a
one-hour session with a therapist and an interpreter, the first step towards
recovery. Nazrin says her life would have been empty if she had not come to
Freedom From Torture. Today, she is an author and still campaigns for human
rights. With our support, Freedom From Torture can transform the lives of more
survivors like Nazrin. Please donate today by searching online for BBC Radio 4
Appeal or call 0800 404 8144. That's 0800 404 8144. Or you can write a cheque to
Freedom From Torture and send it to free post BBC Radio 4 Appeal. That's the
whole address. And importantly, please mark the back of your envelope Freedom
From Torture. Survivors thrive when we support. Thank you. Adio ando. Calls are
free from landlines and mobiles. You can find all the details for giving online
if you search for BBC Radio 4 Appeal. And remember that if you're a UK taxpayer
and if you want Freedom From Torture to collect the gift aid on your donation,
please include an email or postal address so that they can send you a gift aid
declaration. Time now for the weather. Let's join Darren Bett at the BBC Weather
Centre. Hi Darren. Thank you, Rowan. Good morning. It's going to be a cloudy day
again for pretty much all of us today and it's also going to be chilly. If
anything, we've got more showers today than we had yesterday. We've already seen
most of those across northern parts of Scotland. They'll continue through the
rest of the day, maybe even a bit wintry over the tops of the mountains. One or
two showers across other parts of Scotland perhaps today, but we may see the
sunshine coming through now and again. And there could be a glimmer of sunshine
in Northern Ireland today, but we'll continue to see a few showers as well. And
across England and Wales today looks cloudy. There will be a few showers, mainly
coming into Wales, but also brushing some eastern coastal areas of England as
well. Now the winds are still light today. Temperatures on the low side, it's
going to be chilly. We could make eight degrees in western Scotland and Northern
Ireland, but elsewhere I think four to six is going to be nearer the mark. A
couple of changes overnight tonight. There will be some more cloud, there will
be some more showers as well, but we may well find the cloud breaking up across
some eastern parts of England. And we're also introducing colder air across
Scotland. It's going to follow a band of rain with some sleet and snow over the
hills. It will move southwards across Scotland into Northern Ireland by the end
of the night. Then the air gets colder following that and we start to see some
snow showers coming into Northern Scotland. So frost and ice across Northern
Scotland overnight and there may well be a frost in eastern England where the
cloud does break up. Heading into tomorrow, we're following that cold air
southwards. We'll see a band of rain, maybe still with a little bit of sleet and
snow, moving away from southern Scotland, Northern Ireland, moving into Northern
England and North Wales. South of that we'll see a fair bit of cloud and a few
showers, but temperatures across southern parts of England and Wales could be
eight or nine degrees. Following our band of rain we'll see some sunshine across
Scotland and Northern Ireland and the far north of England. Some snow showers,
mainly in Scotland, with temperatures only two Celsius. Darren, thanks very
much. Well, we're off to Edinburgh next, as it happens, for the second Sunday in
length. This morning's Sunday worship will be from the Catholic Church of the
Sacred Heart in Lauriston in Edinburgh. That's in around 10 minutes after the
news. Before that, we are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third-party services and platforms and the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC sounds.