TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-08H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 given the green light to NHS prescriptions in England. And we'll be speaking
live to the Shadow Home Secretary Yvette Cooper. You're listening to Today on
BBC Radio 4 with Michelle Hussain and Nick Robinson. Good morning. It's seven
o'clock on Wednesday, the 8th of March. The headlines this morning, the UN's
refugee agency has said the government's new migration policy violates
international law. But the Prime Minister has insisted he's up for the fight.
The RMT has suspended its planned strike at Network Rail and is now being urged
to enter talks with train companies too. A weight loss injection, which is
popular in Hollywood, has been approved for use on the NHS in England. The BBC
News was read this morning by Jane Steel. The UN refugee agency has expressed
profound concern about the government's new laws designed to prevent almost all
migrants arriving by illegal routes claiming asylum. It says it amounts to an
asylum ban and is urging MPs and peers to pursue what it calls more humane
measures to stop small boats crossing the Channel. Rishi Sunak has insisted the
proposals are necessary and fair. Here's our political correspondent Ian Watson.
The Prime Minister never expected his plans to go unchallenged. The clearest
sign of that was the Home Secretary, Suella Braverman's admission in a letter to
MPs that there was more than a 50% chance that the measures could be
incompatible with the European Convention on Human Rights. And the UK is also a
signatory to the 70-year-old UN Refugee Convention. But the UNHCR's
representative to the UK, Vicki Tennant, told Newsnight that the agency was very
concerned by the new legislation. This is effectively closing off access to
asylum in the UK for people arriving irregularly. We believe it's a clear breach
of the Refugee Convention and remember, even people with very compelling claims
will simply not have the opportunity to put these forward. The government is
hopeful it can pass its legislation by the summer, but if there are legal
challenges, the Prime Minister has declared he's up for the fight. If part of
his motivation is to create clear blue water between government and opposition,
in this respect he has succeeded with Labour claiming that his new system would
be unworkable. But he knows that at the next election voters are likely to
examine the reality and not just rely on the rhetoric when assessing whether he
has delivered on his slogan to stop the boats. It's understood the much of the
day presenter, Gary Lineker, will be spoken to by the BBC about comments he made
on Twitter about the government's immigration plans. A number of Conservative
MPs have expressed anger after he criticised the policy and the language used to
introduce it. The party's deputy chairman, Lee Anderson, said Mr Lineker was out
of touch. Our media correspondent David Silichow reports. Gary Lineker's
response to a video message from Suella Braverman about stopping migrant boats
was, good heavens, this is beyond awful. When challenged by someone on Twitter,
he defended the comments, saying the government's policy was cruel and the
language being used was not dissimilar to that used by Germany in the 30s. It's
provoked a furious response from a number of Conservative MPs. And while Gary
Lineker's not bound by the strict social media policies of BBC News and current
affairs staff, the BBC's Director General, Tim Davie, has discussed the issue of
his comments in the past and it's understood he will be reminded of his
responsibilities. Train companies and the government have urged the RMT to put
their latest pay offer to its members after separate strikes at Network Rail
were suspended because of a new pay offer. The surprise development has raised
hopes of a breakthrough after months of walkouts. Here's our transport
correspondent, Katie Austin. RMT members working for Network Rail are expected
to have a referendum on the amended offer. It's understood no new money had been
put on the table by the government, but some changes have been made to the pay
element of the proposals which were rejected last month. As things stand,
employees at 14 train companies will still take part in strikes on the 16th,
18th and 30th of March and the 1st of April. This will still cause disruption,
albeit not on the same scale as if Network Rail staff were joining them. The
rail delivery group, which represents the train operating companies, called on
the RMT to meet them for urgent talks. The union said last night further updates
would be given on all aspects of the dispute in the coming days. A weekly
injection which helps people lose up to a tenth of their body weight has been
approved for use by the NHS in England. The drug has been heavily hyped on
social media due to its popularity with celebrities. Here's our health and
science correspondent, James Gallaher. Somaglutide is also known by the brand
name Wegovy. It's a weekly injection and it mimics a hormone naturally produced
by the body when we eat. The drug makes people feel full, eat less and lose
weight. It will be restricted to those being treated at NHS weight management
clinics who also have other health problems such as type 2 diabetes or heart
disease. However, the NHS will only offer patients somaglutide for two years and
this decision has been criticised. There's no data on very long term use,
however, it's clear that once people stop taking the drug, their weight starts
increasing. Somaglutide is seen by some as a breakthrough treatment that moves
past the usual mantra of diet and exercise. But there's also concern the mix of
weight loss drugs, which can be bought privately, and ideas of beauty and
celebrity culture could also have a damaging impact on those vulnerable to
eating disorders. You can hear more from James Gallaher with an Inside Health
special on somaglutide at half past three here on Radio 4. The United Nations
Secretary General, Antonio Guterres, will hold talks with President Zelensky in
Kiev today about extending a deal which allows Ukraine to export grain. Russia
has signalled it might let the agreement expire. From Kiev, here's our
diplomatic correspondent, James Landell. Ukraine used to be one of the world's
biggest exporters of grain, so when Russia invaded and closed its ports last
year, global food prices soared and millions faced severe hunger. In July, a
deal was brokered by the UN and Turkey, under which Russia allowed some grain to
be exported via the Black Sea. But this deal has to be renewed every four
months, and Russia has signalled it might not allow an extension next week
unless more is done to lift curbs on its own agricultural exports. For Ukraine,
this matters because it needs to earn foreign currency and empty its silos ready
for next year's harvest. Ukraine has denied any involvement in an attack last
September on the Nord Stream pipelines, which were built to carry Russian gas to
Europe. A report in The New York Times cited anonymous US security officials as
suggesting a pro-Ukrainian group was to blame. German, Danish and Swedish
authorities are investigating the cause of the blasts. Five women have sued the
American state of Texas, saying they were denied abortions even though their
lives were in danger. A US Supreme Court ruling last year removed the
constitutional right to an abortion. Texas allows exceptions for medical
emergencies, but one of the women bringing this legal case, Anna Zagarian, says
her doctors refused to help. I begged my doctors to give me the care I needed.
There must be an exception in this situation. So in my cloud of grief, I spent
the next few hours coordinating flights, hotels and worst of all, trying to find
an out-of-state abortion clinic that could schedule me immediately. The state of
Texas says they want to preserve life, but I've never felt my life mattered less
than it did during this situation. A major survey of plant life shows there's
been a dramatic decline in native species across the UK and Ireland due to
modern agriculture and climate change. Botanists have discovered that for the
first time, invasive flora outnumber long-established plants. Here's our
environment reporter Georgina Ranard. For 20 years, volunteers examined the UK
and Ireland kilometre by kilometre, writing down the flora they found. This so-
called plant atlas, made by the Botanical Society of Britain and Ireland, is the
most complete picture of plant life ever recorded in the UK. What it shows is a
catastrophic decline in flora. The scientists involved say parts of the
landscape have changed so much that someone growing up 70 years ago would
struggle to recognise them today. Invasive species are spreading after being
planted in gardens and escaping into the wild, threatening native plants.
Intensive farming and climate change are reducing the range of many of the
nation's well-known plants like heather. In northern mountains, less snowfall
means some plants may only survive for a few more years. But in the south, some
plants are expanding northwards. A new study suggests bumblebees teach one
another how to solve challenges successfully, scientists from Queen Mary
University of London trained a set of bees to open a puzzle box containing a
sugar reward, and found the insects then passed on that knowledge to others in
their colonies. Researchers say it shows bumblebees are intelligent and capable
of social learning. Jane, thank you very much. It's nine minutes past seven.
Stop the boats looks likely to be a major slogan for the Conservatives for the
election due within less than two years now. We know already that Labour is
opposed to the new law the government has unveiled. The Home Secretary will be
with us in an hour. But in Westminster now is the Shadow Home Secretary Yvette
Cooper, who has called the new legislation a con. Good morning. Good morning,
Michelle. Would a Labour government stop the boats? We do believe we need to
stop the boats. This is dangerous. It puts lives at risk. And it also undermines
our border security. So we need strong action and Labour's proposals include
setting up a new cross border police unit to go after the criminal gangs. The
convictions for people smuggling have dropped. They've halved in the last four
years at a time when this problem has been getting worse. We would also have an
overhaul of the asylum system, including fast tracking cases to safe countries,
speeding up the whole system. That's what people already hear, aren't they? It's
also part of I think it's part of the problem. If if there is a sort of an
indefinite system with huge long delays, then that actually, I think, also
causes more problems here as well. And we would be seeking new agreements with
Europe, in particular, including return agreements and a controlled and managed
alternative system as well. So a series of different things that we would do
that we think would tackle the problem. You believe in your measures. Would you
are you able to say then that a Labour government would stop the boat through
the through the methods that you've just unveiled? You've just talked about.
That is absolutely our objective. And we think it would be more effective than
what the government is doing at the moment. I'm really worried that actually
we're going to see things just keep getting worse and worse, more lives put at
risk, and also that more chaos in the asylum system in the UK. And that's not in
anybody's interest. You have to have a system where we have proper border
security and a managed and controlled asylum and refugee system so that the UK
does its bit alongside other countries to help those who have fled persecution
and conflict. But so we also have proper border security and you don't have
these criminal gangs operating with impunity along our coastline. It should be
possible to do both. Will you be making this a pledge of a Labour government?
Because it's not one of Keir Starmer's missions. It is one of Rishi Sunak's five
priorities, but Keir Starmer did not put it in his five missions. Well, what
Keir said is that there are certain things that become really the bedrock on
which everything else is built. You have to have national security, you have to
have border security, you have to have economic stability. He's then identifying
five areas where we also want the new transformation and changes to the country,
for example, on crime, on economic growth, on different areas for the future.
But border security is one of the bedrocks that you have to deliver whatever
happens. And we, at the moment, it does look like we're going to have to be
facing the Conservatives' mess that they have created, because bear in mind,
this has really escalated in the last three or four years. Those criminal gangs
were not operating in this way three or four years ago and they have taken hold
along our border and they've been allowed to do so and to operate with impunity.
That's why you have to go after those gangs. Well, there have been a lot of
measures that have been unveiled, including cross-border ones, just to pick up
on what you were saying about the need for cross-border action. We've had
repeated cross-border initiatives, joint action plans with the French, joint
intelligence cells, police patrols. This has been a regular thing, which you say
hasn't worked, but cross-border action is again something that you say under
Labour would work. So we support those measures, completely support all the
measures around the patrols and the working along the coast with the French
authorities. But the thing that is missing is actually going after the gang
networks. There were reports this week, for example, that three quarters of the
smugglers were here in the UK. We know we've had this problem on the coast where
some of the asylum hotels, which had children in them, we had 200 children go
missing, most likely picked up by these criminal gangs who may well have been
trafficking them. Nobody's gone after those gangs in the right kind of way. And
that's why you've got the drop in convictions that four people smugglers at a
time when the problem has got worse. And that I think is what is so damaging. If
you don't go after the money, if you don't go after the gang networks, if you
let them operate, they'll just continue to grow and then they'll find ways to
work around whatever government proposals are, whatever the things that are that
are put forward, the gangs will find ways around them to advertise in different
ways and to keep putting lives at risk and to keep undermining the proper
systems and security that we need in place. We did not long ago cover a major
action to break up a smuggling ring that had happened on the south east coast.
But look at it in proportion to the scale of the problem. It is tiny. It's tiny
relative to the scale of the problem. I also want to ask you about the
government's language on this. Do you believe that it is similar to Germany in
the 1930s? No, but I think that they are being irresponsible in the way they're
doing this because they all the time and again, they go for the gimmicks, they
go for the rhetoric, they ramp up the debate on this, but they don't actually
solve the problem. And one of the clear examples of this in what they're doing
is they are actually just likely to make, for example, the asylum accommodation
and hotels problem worse with what they're doing. But just going back to the
language, there's a reason I asked you about that. It's because Gary Lineker is
being spoken to by the BBC for saying on social media that the government's
language on this is similar to Germany in the 1930s. You're saying he's wrong on
that. I don't agree with that. Okay. And he was wrong to say that. Do you think
that the BBC should therefore take significant action against him for saying
that? That's entirely a matter for the BBC. He's somebody who's spoken out very
strongly on lots of different issues and people who feel strongly should be able
to speak out and say the things that they feel. I don't think it's my job to do
that. But I just wanted to just make this final point just about the proposals
that we've got, which is because what the government is doing is they're
effectively proposing to cancel asylum decisions, but with no return agreements
in place. In practice, people will still arrive. They simply won't have an
asylum decision taken, but they will still go into asylum accommodation and
including in hotels. You could have at this rate tens of thousands of people
additionally going into the asylum system and just staying there indefinitely
and making the situation more chaotic and more of a problem. So you end up with
people who have fled persecution and conflict not getting the help they need,
but also people who need to be returned because they are not refugees, not
having any decisions made on them. And the growing problem with hotels in
different places in the country continuing to be used and that problem being
worse rather than better. The Prime Minister did say yesterday that they're
working on more returns agreements beyond the one with Albania. But they're
making that harder because of the way they're doing this. They're making it
actually harder to get proper returns agreements in place. And that's what's
going to make all of this worse. 10 past eight with the Home Secretary on this.
Yvette Cooper, thank you. Thank you. It's past seven now. There's some
potentially good news if you're planning to travel by train next week. The RMT
trade union have called off their strike on network rail, which maintains the
tracks. Though, before you celebrate the strikes in the companies that run the
trains do continue. Our transport correspondent, Katie Austin, can fill us in.
First of all, on that decision, Katie, a new payoff, but we don't know what it
is. Is that right? That's right. We don't know exactly what it is. I understand
the government hasn't put any more money on the table here. So whatever's been
offered is within the existing confines, if you like, or the existing parameters
of the offer that was there before. But something has obviously shifted within
that payoff. And the RMT committee thinks it's been enough to decide to put that
tweaked offer to its members in a vote, a referendum. So that's now what's going
to happen. And network rail workers now won't take part in that strike next
Thursday or overtime bans, which were due to come afterwards. But still strikes
in the train operating companies are likely to go on, presumably because the
government isn't coming up with more money. Yes, I mean, it looks like, I mean,
this is a significant breakthrough. And I do think that maybe the sense is it
could open the door to a further breakthrough. But right now, the strike action
by train companies is very much due to go ahead or by workers at train companies
in the RMT. And that's on the 16th and 18th and 30th of March and the 1st of
April. So far, all we've heard from the RMT is that there will be more updates
on all aspects of the dispute as this week goes on. But the Rail Delivery Group,
which speaks for the train companies in negotiations, says it's called for the
RMT to now come to urgent talks with them. And this has triggered new calls from
the government and the Rail Delivery Group for the RMT to also put the latest
offer, for the RMT to put that offer to their members at train companies as
well. So we'll have to see if the RMT do that. At the moment, it hasn't said.
Just a quick final one, Katie. Can we say yet whether it'll be easy to travel by
train next Thursday, next Saturday, or is it too early to tell? Well, if those
strikes go ahead, there will still be a lot of disruption. It won't be quite the
same as if Network Rail was also involved in the strike action on the 16th,
because when they're involved, it has a really, really big impact across the
whole of Britain. But if they go ahead, there still will be a lot of disruption.
It'll just depend which operator you're using. So in some places, there might
not be as much, whereas other places, there might be very few trains, if any. So
it's one that if you are travelling next Thursday, Saturday, or those other
dates I mentioned, and you have to travel, really do check before you go if
those strikes, as I say, do go ahead as planned. Katie Austin, thank you.
Nineteen minutes past seven now. Investors and their risk appetite. What can we
learn from Britain's biggest investor? Sean's back in the studio with that.
Thanks, Michelle. Good question. Legal and general, £1.3 trillion worth of
investments under its watch. It's reported an increase in profits of about 7%
last year compared to the year before. It made £2.5 billion. I've got Sir Nigel
Wilson with me, Chief Executive of the company. Good morning, Sir Nigel. Good
morning, Sean. What does legal and general's performance in the last year tell
us about how our economy has been doing? Well, it tells us something about our
economy. It tells us much more about how legal and general is doing as not only
the UK's largest investor, but a prominent player across the world. We look
after, as you said, £1.3 trillion of assets. That's £1,300 billion, and each
billion is a thousand million. And we know a million is quite a lot of money. So
this is a huge amount of money that we have to invest. We'd like to invest a lot
more here in the UK, but a combination of regulation policies made it very
difficult to do that over the last 20, 30 years. That's been a hot topic recent
weeks. Are you more inclined to invest in the United States and the European
Union with their investment subsidies that they have going on at the moment? I
think we'll continue to invest in the UK. We have huge investors in the UK, but
we have to recognise we've starved our economy of growth equity, and the
consequence of that is we're a low growth, low productivity, low wage economy
fraught by political infighting. And this has to change. We need the government
to step up and put rules in place and policies in place that allow us to invest
in the real economy in the UK. And that's not what's been happening before. We
used to have in our DB pension portfolio about 55% of it invested in equity. Now
we have about 5% of that invested in equity. That's very different from other
parts of the world. And we're seeing massive initiatives in America and indeed
in Europe and China. Recognising the transition to net zero is a huge investment
opportunity, and we're simply lagging miles behind right now. At the same time,
do you have an aversion to risk maybe as well? Is something changed that means
as the former Conservative Party leader Lord Haig, William Haig, was putting it
yesterday, that we have reduced our risk taking investors here in the UK? We've
invested in 600 startups and 30 cities across the UK investing about 30 billion
in urban regeneration. Our risk appetite hasn't changed at all. The rules and
regulation about how we can deploy that capital have changed over time and made
it much more difficult. And the capital rule is much more onerous in the UK than
they need to be. And as a consequence of that, many of our clients are risk
averse right now. And we have to change that on a go forward basis. Sir Nigel,
thank you. Sir Nigel Wilson, Chief Executive of Legal & General. Thanks, Sean.
22 minutes past seven. Keep your cat in the house. Or if you insist on letting
them out, keep them on a lead. Cats are killers. That is the message coming from
a growing number of councils in Australia, led by a council in Fremantle,
Western Australia, which has banned cats from many public areas. And one of
those who's been campaigning for that is an elected official, Aidan Lang, who
joins us on the line. Morning to you. What have you got against cats? G'day,
Nick, from sunny Fremantle in Perth, Western Australia. Yeah. What have we got
against cats? Nothing, actually. We just want to keep them on their owners'
properties where they're safe and where they're having less impact on our iconic
Australian wildlife. Because you've called them, I think, mass killers. Yeah,
the data is there. Cats kill, it's estimated, three billion animals a year in
Australia. And it's estimated domestic cats kill up to 390 million animals a
year in Australia. So the data is certainly there to prove they are mass
killers. And it's having a devastating impact on the ecology of Australia, where
our wildlife hasn't evolved with a predator like a cat. We've got the cute,
cuddly, ground-dwelling wildlife in Australia, and the cats are going around and
just killing them all. So how do you think people should keep a cat in their own
property? Because they prowl about, don't they? That's the whole point of cats,
is they're independent. Well they've evolved. They're extremely efficient
hunters. And you're right, they do prowl around. When they're out, they're
hunting. In Australia, we've got a term, a porch or a patio. We're looking to
people now to build a catio, where you keep your cat in your backyard. It's got
a net over it. There's a little area where it can run around. It's got a
scratching pole. People in Australia are now building these beautiful spaces for
their cats, where they can exercise and where they're safe as well. A sort of
cat run, a catio. I love the idea of that. And the feedback I've been getting is
people might take their cats for a walk on a lead. Yeah, funny you say that. I
was actually in the pub the other week and someone was down there with their cat
on a lead in the pub. So times are definitely changing when it comes to
exercising your cat. What do you say to people listening to this who are howling
at their radio saying, leave the poor cats alone. This is impulsively cruel to
restrict them to being on a lead or in the house or stuck in a catio, however
smart and posh it is. Yeah, well, it's actually better and less cruel if your
cat is kept safe at home. It's less likely to be hit by a car. It's not going to
get attacked by the neighbour's dog if it's in their backyard. It's not going to
get in cat fights and catch diseases. It's not going to get ticks or fleas. Your
cat's going to live longer at home and you'd argue that's probably less cruel
than letting it roam around where it's possibly going to get injured or killed
itself. Now you hardly need selling I think Aidan, people are obsessed often
with their cats. They love their cats. Do you find, even though Australia has
very different wildlife, of course, to the wildlife we have here in the UK, are
you getting a lot of abuse for taking on the cat? Not at all. I frequently get
emails and messages on Twitter. People stop me in the street and say, good on
you, well done, this should have happened years ago, keep going with this. We
want to see all cats kept at home with their owners. We understand cats are
important companions as well. We don't want to take cats away, we just want to
keep them on their owner's property where they're safe. Aidan Lang, Councillor
in Fremantle, near Perth, Western Australia. Thank you very much indeed. A
catio. Yes, well, it doesn't sound great does it, all of that wire mesh. He's
going to catch on. But very, oh Nick, interesting though. Never thought about
cats that way, but now we know, keep them close to you, at least in Australia.
Meanwhile, Rob with the Sport. Morning Rob. Morning Michelle, never thought of
Nick as the pun meister either. Good morning to you, quite a night at Stamford
Bridge last night. Chelsea fans can believe again after that 2-0 win against
Borussia Dortmund, a result that brought them through to the Champions League
quarter-finals 2-1 on aggregate. A goal just before half-time from Raheem
Sterling and then another shortly after the break, a twice-taken penalty from
Kai Havertz, the second of which Chelsea manager Graham Potter simply couldn't
bear to watch. I watched the first penalty and that didn't work so well, so I
thought I'd look at the floor and just wait for the crowd to make a noise and
thank me they did. So then at that point I can't do anything, it's just down to
Kai and down to Kai's personality and temperament and obviously that's at a
very, very high level. Well let's get a fuller account from football
correspondent John Murray. Good morning John. Morning Rob. Chelsea's previous 12
games, they'd only produced two wins, this was certainly much more like it
wasn't it from Potter's side? They discovered two crucial elements last night
Chelsea, form and fortune. And I'm not sure how many went to Stamford Bridge
with confidence last night with Chelsea in this very unfamiliar position of
being halfway down the Premier League. They'd not scored as many as two goals in
one match since December, but the breaks went their way as you described and so
Graham Potter finds himself in the quarter-finals of the Champions League. Yes,
yes, the game hinged on that twice-taken Havertz penalty for a handball offence,
but was it a penalty in the first place and should it have been retaken? Yeah,
that was the pivotal moment in the whole match, in the whole tie. Two huge VAR
interventions, that went Chelsea's way. I think the award of the penalty was
debatable and then when Kyle Havertz missed it, hit a post, VAR stepped in
again, spotted encroachment into the box by Dortmund defenders, which was
debated, disputed by Dortmund, but the correct decision I felt. So 2-0 up,
Dortmund then had chances coming in, they were one of the most informed top
clubs in Europe, but they couldn't take them, so Chelsea are through. Much said
beforehand John about how crucial this match might be for Graham Potter's future
at Chelsea. Where does a place in the Champions League quarter-finals leave him?
Well, such an important night for him and I can understand why he didn't want to
watch the retaken penalty, because he's cut rather a beleaguered figure in
recent times. He's been in charge for only six months. When it was pointed out
to him last night that the owner Todd Bowley was there and whether that was
significant, he said, well I'm still here, but six months in the job, that's his
best moment yet as the Chelsea manager. Yes, and meanwhile it's Tottenham
against AC Milan this evening. Tottenham, like Chelsea, one nil down from the
first leg. Something similar tonight for Spurs would keep their fans happy too I
suppose. Yeah, Tottenham fourth in England, Milan, who are the Italian
champions, currently fifth in the league in Italy. Spurs have got their manager
Antonio Conte back after he's recovered from his recent gallbladder operation.
But yes, one nil down, need to do the same kind of thing as Chelsea. So, same as
last night, first goal is crucial. Yes, John Murray, thanks very much. Another
story this morning. England's vice captain Courtney Laws will miss the rest of
Rugby Union's Six Nations tournament, a shoulder injury limited Laws to just 12
minutes against Wales. Michael Vaughan's lawyer has told the Cricket Discipline
Commission hearing that the investigation into whether he made an alleged racist
comment in 2009 was woefully inadequate. The hearing into racism at Yorkshire
Cricket Club continues. And Emma Raducanu was pulled out of a charity exhibition
prior to her opening match at Indian Wells tomorrow. Raducanu recently had
tonsillitis and hasn't played since January's Australian Open. Here are the
tips. Fonthill 310, number one, forever blessed. Lingfield 4 o'clock, number
six, come to pass. Thanks Rob. William Crawley hosts tonight's edition of the
Moral Maze. Here he is now. Can you keep a secret? It's a question some are
asking the journalist Isabel Oakeshott after she broke her word and made public
the political treasure trove of Matt Hancock's WhatsApp messages. But you don't
need to be a journalist to struggle at times with whether or not to keep a
promise. If you promised a friend to keep a secret, would you feel duty bound to
keep shtum no matter what? Or would it sort of, well, depend? If there are
sometimes good reasons to break a confidence, is there such a thing as a morally
justified betrayal? Tonight's Moral Maze, the promises we make sacrosanct or
subject to negotiation after the news at 8pm. Today's weather now, further
spells of rain, sleet and snow will move across Wales, central and southern
England. Further north, you'll have brighter skies. 29 minutes to 8 now, you're
listening to Today on Radio 4 with Michelle Hussain and Nick Robinson and Jane
Steel has a summary of the news. The UN Refugee Agency, the UNHCR, says it's
very concerned about the government's new policy on migrants arriving by boat,
describing it as a clear breach of the Refugee Convention. Rishi Sunak has said
plans to detain and remove asylum seekers who cross the Channel and stop them
ever returning are tough but necessary and fair. The UNHCR said the measures
amounted to an asylum ban and would block even those with a compelling case.
Train companies have renewed calls for the RMT Rail Union to put their most
recent pay offer to members, who are scheduled to stage four strikes over the
next three weeks. Last night the union announced it had suspended walkouts by
signallers and maintenance workers at Network Rail to allow a vote by its
members on a new pay offer. A weekly injection which helps people lose weight
has been endorsed for use by the NHS in England. So Maglutide will be available
only through specialist services for a maximum of two years. Evidence shows that
once people stop taking the drug, their weight starts increasing. The UN
Secretary General, Antonio Guterres, will hold talks with President Zelensky in
Ukraine today. Negotiations are intensifying on a deal that allows the country
to export grain via the Black Sea, which was brokered by the UN in Turkey last
year. Russia has signalled it might let the agreement expire. The owner of
Twitter, Elon Musk, has apologised to a sacked worker who he said in a tweet did
no actual work. Hatley Thorleifson has contacted his boss publicly on the social
media site to find out if he still had a job and the resulting exchange was
widely shared. Mr Musk apologised for misunderstanding the situation. A major
survey of plant life shows there's been a dramatic decline in native species
across the UK and Ireland due to modern agriculture and climate change.
Botanists have discovered that for the first time, invasive flora outnumber
long-established plants. Jane, thank you. It's 27 minutes to eight now. Justice,
it's often been said, must not only be done, it must be seen to be done. Yet
that oft-repeated dictum has not applied in the family courts. Until, that is,
an experiment in open justice began. For a year, in three court centres,
journalists have been able to report cases, provided they kept families
anonymous. These judgments, Roma, can affect families forever, including placing
children in care or up for adoption. And our correspondent, Sanjeev Bhatia, has
been one of the journalists who spent many weeks in Leeds Family Court attending
those hearings and producing a series of reports – we'll hear them all this week
– that highlight some of the issues that are usually hidden. Sanjeev is back
with me in the studio. Tell me what you're now able to do that you couldn't
before. Well, what we're able to do that we couldn't before is report what we
see and hear in court. We can obtain court documents and quote from some of
them. And critically, we can talk to families. Now, most of the cases that we
observed were care cases where children were being removed from their families,
taken into foster care, or in some cases being placed for adoption. But we also
saw a handful of other cases where children were being reunited with their
families. And the very first case I'm focusing on is one of those stories, and
it is quite an exceptional one, where a woman managed to get her fifth child
returned to her – he was taken away at birth – after having her four other
babies taken into care. Jessie is a mother of five, but Freddie is the only baby
she's been able to keep. He was taken into care the day he was born, but last
month the Family Court said he could return to his parents for good. Jessie is
not her real name, and her words are spoken by an actor. It just felt so
strange. I mean, the first night we had him at home, it was really, really
strange to wake up to a crying baby. I woke up thinking, what's that? But then
when I peeked over the cot and saw his little smiley face, I was just like,
yeah, the fight was worth it. And I'm so glad that I didn't give up. Jessie had
mental health problems, had abused, drugs and alcohol. Her first son was taken
away at birth. She quickly got pregnant again, and the next baby was removed
too. And again, and again. In all, four children were taken into care. Jessie
was told she needed therapy, but couldn't get it. It was a vicious, vicious
circle. And one thing that I don't really understand is why do they say, right,
you need to do X, Y, Z, that's not available? I mean, if we spent less time
funding on things that don't need to happen, over them things that do need to
happen, then maybe there won't be a lot of parents that's going through this.
Leeds Family Court is an unattractive, late two-tone 20th century block, looming
over a busy road. It was inside this building that we met Jessie for the first
time last month. She, her partner and baby Freddie were waiting in a drafty
corridor to go into court. The baby was charming everyone, smiling at all the
lawyers and gurgling. He'd been back with his parents for a few weeks. In court,
the senior judge, Nancy Hillier, praised them. Her words are spoken by an actor.
It has to be said, these parents have done incredibly well with Freddie, and
past mistakes have not been repeated. He is described as thriving in their care.
He won't be able to convey his wishes and feelings, but his smiles speak. He is
clearly very happy in the care of his parents. After the hearing, I spoke to
Jessie. I'd seen her smiling as the judge spoke about the changes she'd made. I
asked her why she'd looked pleased. What was she thinking? It was like having
someone turning around to the local authority and saying to them, on my behalf,
I told you so, not the other way around. Because I was literally screaming all
the way through the pre-birth assessment, and I'm there saying, look, this is
the changes I've made. How did you manage to make those changes without doing
therapy? When I met my partner, I will say, I did all the checks on him. And
when it came back squeaky clean, I thought, you know something, this is my shot
at being happy. And when restrictions got lifted, I went and did a really good
course, which led me to get a really good job. And this job, I know I have to
keep my nose clean. I can't afford to have a mental breakdown. I can't afford to
get arrested or I'd lose it. It'd be gone. Jessie's unusual. Many mothers can't
get out of that vicious cycle. In England, close to 3,000 babies every year are
born into care. Professor Karen Broadhurst of Lancaster University. So we've
been researching this issue now going back to 2014, trying to make the case for
holistic therapeutic help. And we know statistics remain stubbornly high. We
estimate that one in every four women at least will return to court. And for the
very youngest women, this will be one in three, which is an incredibly high
proportion. We can report Jessie's case anonymised thanks to an experiment in
open justice that's currently running in Leeds, Cardiff and Carlisle. Jessie
said in her other cases, she had felt invisible in the family court. She was
pleased to see us there. I thought it's about time. It's about time because
family courts need to stop being so private. People need to know what's going
on. That was Sanchia Berg reporting and she'll be reporting each day over the
next few days on what we can now hear and learn from the family courts. Let's
turn to the papers now. And in the Times, there's a comment piece from Alice
Thompson, which is about flashing, which we've been talking about for a couple
of days. I'm not sure if that is that and the sentencing of Wayne Cousins the
other day is what sparked Alice Thompson's piece. But she writes about her own
experience being flashed at around the age of 11 and indeed cyber flashing
subsequently, which has happened to her. And the effect of all of this on the
lives of her daughters and their friends, this kind of behaviour, she says, as
much as the news stories of murderers such as Cousins is why my daughter and her
female friends don't go for a run after dark, enter a subway alone, walk back
from a club without a chaperone or even cycle through the woods without a
companion. They know it is still statistically highly unlikely they will be
killed outside their own homes, but they have personal experience of male
strangers behaving badly in public places or perhaps even flashing them at work,
as happened to the McDonald's staff serving Cousins. So she's essentially just
looking at the whole gamut of what has happened then and now and how prevalent
all of this continues to be. Part of the debate has of course been about whether
we take flashing or what many people prefer to call indecent exposure seriously
enough. And a case on the front page of the Sun will raise that once again.
Kyle's 90 minutes of shame is the front page. Now it looks like a story that
you're familiar with from tabloids of bad boy behaviour amongst footballers.
What makes it particularly relevant though is not just that England player, big
Manchester City fan, Manchester City star I'm sorry as well, but that he did
drop his trousers and was video dropping his trousers with a headline in the Sun
called Flash and Grab. There's no statement from Walker at the time that the Sun
produced this story or from Manchester City, but most importantly not from the
police. What will they do in response? I love that piece by Alice Thompson as if
girls and women are repeatedly intimidated, their worlds shrink and they are the
ones who end up feeling imprisoned by this unacceptable misogynist behaviour. In
The Guardian there's a comment piece by Lucy Pasha Robinson with some really
startling figures in it. It's all about how last month her daughter got the flu
and the effect on looking after her on the family earnings alongside the nursery
fees that they paid despite her being unable to attend left the family at least
£700 in the red for the second time in three months. She's using it as a way of
talking about the prices that people pay for childcare in this country. She says
working families are now being expected to swallow gargantuan losses like this
on a month to month basis. Britain's nursery fees are some of the most expensive
in the world. A full time place for a child under the age of two costs on
average more than £14,000 a year in the UK. In London it's at least £19,000 a
year. Sitting at a time when the government is hoping to get votes in the so-
called red wall, just to see what the red tops say in their editorials, the
Daily Mirror says that the policy on migration is quote soundbites over policy.
The Sun on the other hand says it is the only game in town. It's now just after
22.8. Climate change, changes in land use and decisions on what we plant and how
we deal with waste have all contributed to a decline in native plants and the
extent of that has been documented in a study involving thousands of volunteers
looking at species present in 10 square kilometre grids. In the Plant Atlas
2020, which is a book and a new website both from the Botanical Society of
Britain and Ireland, Julia Hanmer is its chief executive. She's here with us.
Morning Julia. Morning. How stark is that decline? Well Plant Atlas 2020 shows
that more than half of our native wild species are in decline. Familiar plants
like heather and hairbell. And this is really devastating for the plants we know
and love but also for other wildlife like insects, birds and bats that rely on
our wild plants for food and shelter. So how much of all of that is because of
human actions as well as climate change? I mean climate change is obviously also
a man-made phenomenon but I'm interested in how much what people plant and the
clearing of land use has contributed to that. Well I mean the major drivers are
agricultural intensification, habitat loss but we're also seeing climate change
signals. But it's things like reseeding of meadows and over fertilisation and
grazing pressures but also weed killers in towns and cities and we're seeing on
mountain tops we're seeing species like alpine speedwell and snow pearlwort
which depend on areas where snow lies late in the spring affected by climate
change and they're declining. What about what people do in their own gardens
because we're often told please plant a native species at the same time a lot of
people would plant palms and bamboo and olives because we know that in a time of
climate change they're likely to fare quite well. Give us some pointers on what
to do and not to do. Well it's great to plant native species. It's also really
important not to dispose of garden waste in the wild so be very careful how you
dispose of your garden waste because the little roots and seeds can regenerate
in the wild. It's also if you have a pond or an artificial pond or an aquarium
fish pond don't dispose of the water in the wild because there can be plants as
well that can be invasive that can take over wild ponds and lakes and streams as
well. Does that mean don't even dispose of that water in your garden? The same
thing can happen? Well it's just really important to be careful how you dispose
of it. And how much of a problem is the disposing of garden waste in the wild
currently? So what we're finding is that there are more non-native species in
the wild now than there are wild species. Many of those are benign and only
locally distributed but some have become really invasive like New Zealand pygmy
weed and are taking over habitats so they need tackling and control. And we
found that Sitka spruce has shown the biggest range increase of all species in
Plant Atlas 2020 which is really deeply concerning because it can regenerate
into moorlands and peatlands reducing their ability to store carbon. So we need
to tackle those invasive species and restore our native woodlands instead of
planting non-native. So those two plants in particular would be better not to
plant at all? Yes. Tell me those again. So New Zealand pygmy weed and then Sitka
spruce is a forest plantation. New Zealand pygmy weed. That's a new one to me.
Is it popular? It can be. Okay right. But it shouldn't be. Useful. Okay. Thank
you very much. Julia Hanmer. Beware the pygmy weed. It's quarter to eight now
and it's time for Thought for the Day. The speaker this morning is Angela Tilby,
Canon Emeritus of Christchurch Cathedral, Oxford. Good morning. I wonder if like
me you felt a shiver of excitement when you heard yesterday about the Roman
shrine discovered by archaeologists next to Leicester Cathedral. I love these
moments of discovery, these sudden physical links to a past age, to people
living and dying and occupying the spaces we now live in with their different
beliefs and customs and assumptions. The find means that there were people
worshipping at this spot more than 2,000 years ago, which suggests that those
who have worshipped in the present-day cathedral and will again when its current
building works are completed are close to where their ancestors prayed. As to
what or who was worshipped, one of the candidates is the Roman Mithras, whose
cult had travelled west from Persia and India. Mithras was born from a rock and
had links with the cult of the unconquered sun. There's a perfect example of an
underground temple to Mithras beneath the church of San Clemente in Rome, just a
few minutes' walk from the Colosseum. This temple was apparently built by a
Roman nobleman at the start of the third century. You can see a replica of the
altar with a carving of Mithras slaying a bull and snakes symbolising rebirth.
You joined the cult by a kind of baptism, bull's blood was poured over you
through a grating. This was a strong god, a violent god, but also one who
offered rebirth. You might wonder why Mithraism disappeared and was replaced by
Christianity. I remember some used to claim that Christianity stole its best
bits from the cult of Mithras. In fact, the two faiths did have things in
common. Mithras' birthday was on what became Christmas Day, December 25th in the
Roman calendar. And there was the rite of baptism and a belief in spiritual
regeneration. But perhaps one reason Mithraism died out was that it was
exclusive to men and military men at that. The emperor Constantine made
Christianity legal, at least in part to make his empire more inclusive. Whether
the Lester Find really is linked to Mithras is speculation at this stage. But
whatever ancient faith it represents, it speaks to me of a persistent quest in
the human soul. The sun rises and sets, marking our days with a rhythm endlessly
renewed. We have an instinct for wonder which is close to the instinct for
worship. Mithras was born from rock, the risen Christ from a rocky tomb. There
is spiritual treasure still buried in the ground and meaning beyond the surface
of things. That was Thought for the Day with Canon Angela Tilby. It's now 12
minutes to eight. Six billion pounds a year is the estimated cost to the NHS of
dealing with the consequences of obesity. That's part of the background to the
regulator NISA's decision to allow semaglutide, an appetite suppressant, to be
prescribed to people in England through specialist weight loss services. Why did
they decide to allow what is often called the skinny jab to be available on the
NHS in England for two years when evidence suggests that its effects only last
while it is being taken? We'll hear from them in a moment. But first the
experience of one woman, Amy Latham, who was prescribed the drug back in
November. I've literally tried every diet under the CERN, different medications,
none of which have had much success. It's been life changing to be completely
honest. So I started on November the 17th I think it was and to date I've lost
just two pounds short of three stone. My blood results are absolutely perfect
now. I'm well out of the pre-diabetic range. Just general well-being is just so
much better since I've been on it. Well, Helen Knight is one of those who made
the decision. She's Director of Medicine's Evaluation at NICE. Good morning.
Good morning. Tell us how you came to that decision. We've been looking at
semaglutide and to start we're really pleased to publish the final guidance
today to help those at highest risk of the adverse effects of obesity to access
this medicine on the NHS to help them lose weight. The trial evidence that we
looked at showed that people taking this drug alongside the lifestyle
interventions lost on average 12% more of their body weight compared with
placebo. There are some potential side effects along with taking this treatment,
mostly gastrointestinal, and that's in part why this needs to be delivered as
part of a package of care in specialist weight management services. But we do
know, don't we, that someone like Amy is more than likely to put at least some
weight back on when she stops taking semaglutide? Yeah, that can be the case.
We've made a recommendation that specifies use for two years within the
specialist weight management service and that was driven by the evidence that
we've seen. We've only really seen evidence that patients have treatment for two
years. And the way that we analyse the data, we have acknowledged that there may
be a reduction in the benefit over time and so that people may put weight on in
the future. But even taking account of that, we think that this is a clinically
effective treatment and a good use of NHS services. But we are looking out for
more evidence. We're aware that there's more research ongoing that will use the
treatment for longer. And once that evidence is available, we'll of course be
looking to review that evidence. And of course, if it's clinically and cost
effective, we'll be able to recommend it for use for longer. Okay, can you just
explain that a bit more? So if you decided that even taking that into account
there is still a benefit, is that because overall people are still not as obese
as they were when they first started taking it? Therefore, whatever the
reduction in weight, that is a benefit to them and to the NHS? Yeah, that's
correct. So I mean, people with obesity and overweight can have other weight
related illnesses. And so the benefits that you get from the weight reduction
over that time period do continue even after they've stopped. So, you know, if
they've lost a lot of weight, there will be other benefits as well that will
continue for after the treatment is stopped itself. It's not something is it,
which is doing anything to help us prevent obesity. And it's quite
extraordinary, both as the proportion of the population, which is about 25% of
adults in England, but also just how poor we are on this compared to other
countries in Europe. I think that's why it's important that this isn't just a
drug to be taken on its own. It needs to be given with a package of care within
a specialist weight management service. And that's what the medicine is actually
licensed for. It's to be given alongside, you know, other lifestyle
interventions, so a reduced calorie diet and an increased activity as well. So I
think it's important to think of this as it's quite a holistic way of managing
obesity and overweight. But of course, we know that there is more to do in terms
of education, etc. But this recommendation from NICE is about targeting those
people that are at highest risk of adverse effects of obesity. Is it possible
that people end up being prescribed semaglutide for the rest of their life in
the way that people take statins for the rest of their life? I guess that's a
potential. Obesity is a chronic illness. And we heard that from our clinical and
patient experts who were involved in our process. And other chronic illnesses,
people do take treatments for a lifetime. But as I said, we've only seen
evidence at this point for two years worth of treatment. So once further
evidence becomes available, we'll be able to understand the benefit of the
treatment and any potential future risks of longer term treatment as well. It's
interesting that you are leaving the door open to that. And if that is the case,
do you think looking at the costs of this drug, it is still the cost benefit
when you look at the cost of the NHS of dealing with obesity still lands in
favour of prescribing the drug? Well, that's difficult to say at the moment
because our work at NICE is based on available evidence. So we would want to see
what would be the increase in the benefits to patients of taking it longer term
and what the associated costs would be. And that's where we would need a
committee to deliberate over that and ensure if we were to recommend it, that it
would still be considered value for money. And there are some doctors and
psychologists we spoke to earlier who are worried about access to this. And I
know that is a decision for the NHS in the way that they decide to prescribe it.
But we obviously have a lot more obese people than it looks like there are
specialist management services, the kind of places that people would have to go
to get this rather than just simply getting a prescription from their GP. If we
actually want to make maximum use of it, do we need to think more widely than
just those specialist services? Well, we've recommended it for those specialist
services because that's part of the licensing of the treatment and the way that
that care is actually currently delivered in the NHS. We heard that there are
challenges with the capacity of these types of services. And we know that the
NHS is currently considering how to deliver those services and whether they can
be expanded in the future. So as you say, it's not something that we can
directly do, that's directly within NICE's remit. But obviously it would be
great to see an expansion in those services so that more people can get access
to this treatment. But we need to just make sure that they're getting the right
support in those services to make sure that we deliver the clinical benefits
that we've seen. And how confident are you on supply? Because this is also
available on private prescriptions. Indeed, that was already the case before
your decision. We could, couldn't we, end up in the scenario where supplies
aren't available for those who need it enough to be prescribed on the NHS? Yeah,
so we're currently awaiting the launch of Wegovi from the company. And so it
would be the responsibility of the company in discussions with the NHS to ensure
that the supply chain is there for the demand. So, you know, I have no reason at
this point to feel concerned about that. And I guess, you know, the point of
NICE's guidance is to signal to the NHS that for this group of patients, it's a
clinically and cost effective use of resources. And I do hope that, you know,
we're able to get the supply that's needed to give it to the patients who need
it the most. Alan Knight from the regulators NICE. Thank you. It is now three
minutes to eight time for the weather. Here's Chris. Hi, Nick. And we're looking
at some localised disruption this morning across the south of England and
southern parts of Wales with lying snow quite widely and a little bit more snow
to come as well as we go through the morning. But towards the south coast, we
are seeing outbreaks of rain. And I think as we go on through the morning, we
will see a transition to sleet and then rain across much of southern England. At
the same time, an area of heavier precipitation works into Wales. Now, I think
at low levels, places like Cardiff, yes, we probably will see any snow turn to
rain. But over the hills, I suspect we'll see a zone of very heavy snow pushing
in through the afternoon and into the evening time. Might see even in excess of
10 centimetres across some of the higher areas here. And some of that snowy
weather will then push into the Midlands as we go on through the late afternoon
or evening time, bringing the potential for a few centimetres of snow. So there
is the risk of seeing some disruption for these areas, I think, as we go on
through the day. Now, for northern England, Northern Ireland and Scotland, for
the most part, it's a cold and frosty start. Indeed, in Scotland, we've had the
lowest temperature of the year so far. Temperatures down to minus 15 this
morning. There will be plenty of sunshine for most areas with just a few snow
showers for Northern Ireland and North East England. However, snow showers will
continue to come through thick and fast across northern Scotland, where we are
likely to see some disruptive weather. Temperatures struggling three to five
degrees Celsius across most parts of the country. Now, Thursday and Friday sees
some very heavy snow across some central regions, particularly in the hills. I
think Wales and the Pennines could see 20 to perhaps even 40 centimetres of snow
with significant disruption. That's the latest. Chris, thank you very much. On
BBC iPlayer... Step right in. Perfect timing. The East End is ever-changing.
What is this? Scooter? The order has entered the 1960s. Barely eight years late.
But the midwives of Nunatta's house are forever constant. You've a home here
now. And purpose. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third-party services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds. In music education across the UK, we'll be talking about
why older women are sometimes referred to as hopekids.