TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 On Friday mornings at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BEEPING BBC News at nine
o'clock. Police in Sussex who are searching for a missing eight-week-old baby
say they've found the remains of an infant in woods near Brighton. Earlier,
officers had applied to hold the child's parents, Constance, Martin and Mark
Gordon, in custody for a further 36 hours, on suspicion of gross negligence
manslaughter. The couple were arrested on Monday after sleeping rough for nearly
two months. Chief Superintendent James Cullis from Sussex Police said it was a
tragic development. I understand that the conclusion of this search will be
heart-breaking for the local community and the wider public who have been
impacted by and so supportive of this search and the investigation from the
outset. Allies of the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock say he's considering
legal action after the Daily Telegraph alleged that, in the middle of April
2020, he rejected expert advice to give Covid tests to everyone going into care
homes in England. He denies the claim. This evening, the Telegraph has published
a new allegation claiming that in September 2020, secondary school children in
England were required to wear masks to avoid a row with Scotland, which had
already introduced the measure. China has criticised the FBI for saying a
laboratory leak in Wuhan was the most likely source of the Covid-19 virus. A
Chinese foreign ministry official said the United States' intelligence community
had a history of misdeeds and deception. Greece's Prime Minister Kyriakos
Mitsotakis has blamed what he called tragic human error for one of the country's
worst-ever rail disasters. At least 38 people were killed in a head-on collision
between a passenger service and a freight train. Police have charged a local
station master with manslaughter, with local media reporting that he's
acknowledged routing a train on the wrong track by mistake. A spokeswoman for
the Duke and Duchess of Sussex has confirmed that the couple have been asked to
vacate their residence at Frogmore Cottage on the Windsor Castle estate. It
follows unconfirmed reports that the King wants Prince Andrew to move in. BBC
News. There's a crisis in UK music education. In today's climate there's a lot
less funding available to support many young musicians who would like to pursue
their interest. I'm Soweto Kinch, a musician myself, and in a new three-part
series I'll be finding out why the future of British music is under threat. If
you don't have adequate provision in our schools that is going to have an impact
on the talent pipeline and it is going to have an impact in terms of the
diversity of that talent pipeline. Is it in danger of becoming an elitist
occupation? Rethinking Music on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds starts next Tuesday
morning at 11.30. From Matt Hancock's texts to a new take on Covid's origin, why
journalism is reliving 2020, that's a topic on the Media Show with Ros Atkins,
coming up in half an hour. But now on BBC Radio 4, Radio 4 costing the earth
with ever-rising sea levels. Kasa Alam asks how realistic it is to continue to
defend our coastal communities. I'm in Fairbourn on the north-western coast of
Wales, about 50 miles south of Carnarvon. It's a small, pleasant village.
There's a primary school, a railway station, and people say hello as you walk
by. Right now I'm walking along the Shingled Beach, this bank of thick, round
blackened stones and sand. That's the only thing between the roaring waves and
the neat row of bungalows that rest about 50 metres away from the seafront.
Fairbourn first came into the news about ten years ago, and it's been in and out
ever since. Computer models suggested that rising sea levels could mean this
place having to be decommissioned as a village, and its residents were then
called by some the UK's first climate refugees. We'll find out what this means
for Fairbourn later in the programme. But this isn't just a story about one
Welsh village. Sea levels are rising everywhere, and that means coastal
communities across the UK are going to be under threat as the waves creep ever
nearer to homes and businesses. In today's Costing the Earth, I'm asking whether
we're facing up to that yet, or are we still burying our heads in the ever-
moving sands? Well, the challenge we face is that climate change is causing
rising sea levels and more extreme weather, and that is putting more communities
at risk of flooding. Now, in most places we can manage that risk, we can build
flood defences and make communities more resilient so that when flooding happens
they can get back to life more quickly. But there are some places on our coasts
where those rising sea levels and erosion are eventually just going to take away
the land on which some communities sit, or will simply make those places
uninhabitable. James Bevan is Chief Executive Officer of the Environment Agency,
which handles flood defences in England. He's realistic about the fate of some
coastal communities. We will not be able to protect over the long term
communities forever with flood defences, and that means some will eventually
have to move. Now, that doesn't and won't happen immediately, but we do need to
start the conversation about what options those communities have, what kind of
future they want, and start preparing to help them get there. And we also need,
of course, to continue to tackle the cause of the problem, which is the climate
emergency itself. How soon are we going to have to look at giving up this land,
I suppose, or moving communities from the coast right now? How soon is that
going to have to happen, or those conversations, to use your words, how soon are
those conversations going to happen so communities can prepare? Well, those
conversations are already starting. So we work, we the Environment Agency, we
work very closely with the local authorities who are responsible for coastal
erosion. We are responsible for coastal flooding, so we work together, all
around the coastal areas where there are risks, to identify the best way to
manage those risks, both in the short term and in the longer term. So for most
parts of the coast where there are large communities, there is an agreed
approach which we call hold the line, and that means we will seek to keep the
coastline more or less where it is to protect those communities. There are other
options. One is called managed realignment, which is where we will work with
nature to realign the coast, but to protect communities as far as we can.
Managed realignment often means moving existing flood defences further inland
and allowing more space for natural defences like salt marsh. And then there is
another option called no active intervention, which means what it says, the
approach is to let nature take its course, and which approach we take depends on
a range of factors, including the size of any threatened community, how feasible
and affordable it is to protect it, and how sustainable that protection is in
the long term. Here in Fairbourn, there could be a sizeable threat to the
community. My name is Georgina Salt. I'm current chair of the Arthur community
council, and I've been a resident of Fairbourn for 20 years. Tell me what
happened here in 2013. Well, in 2013 there was a shoreline management plan
developed to assess the risks of flooding and over-topping of the sea for the
whole of the Welsh coastline. And in that shoreline management plan, Fairbourn
was identified as needing to be in realignment. Unfortunately, we didn't know
very much about it at the time. Obviously, it stimulated the finer examination
of the position of Fairbourn. And so more detailed measurements were taken, and
basically they were saying that because the village lies under high tide level
at least twice a month, that there was a very good chance that if the sea wall
breached, that we could have up to 1.5 metres of water coming into the village.
And so it sort of gave the impression that the whole place was going to go under
water. They then produced a document called the Fairbourn Master Plan. And the
Fairbourn Master Plan coined this phrase of decommissioning the village, taking
it out of action. This had been commissioned as a consultative document. This
was never really explained. And so it was taken as being absolute fact that this
was going to happen. But the real hassle happened when in 2014, in the winter
storms, which were excessive at that time, we had a national TV programme that
had picked up on the shoreline management plan and then produced a programme
that turned around and said Fairbourn was going to be decommissioned and was no
longer going to be in existence. It was going to be razed to the ground. When
the programme was aired, the village was stunned. And we were never particularly
disabused of that notion until recent times when we found out that really and
truly Gwynedd Council had never signed off on actually decommissioning the
village. And that this document was going to be dependent on the science that
was coming through. But it created so much angst in the village, as you can
imagine. And overnight, the properties were devalued by 40%. House sales fell
through. People panicked and did cash sales at a much reduced rate. And then it
became impossible to get mortgages in the area. The end result was that the
Fairbourn project board was created, mixing together all the stakeholders that
had an interest. So that became the Welsh Government, the Gwynedd Council,
National Resources Wales, the railway line. And they basically supported the
village in trying to move forward from the position it had been placed in. Right
now, the long-term fate of Fairbourn is still unclear. But some places have
already taken radical decisions about whether they should continue to defend
against the waves. At the other end of the country, on the Gower Peninsula, the
National Trust is one of them. Time to put my walking boots on. Well, as far as
winter walks go, this is going to take some beating. I'm in South Wales, Cermiby
to be exact, walking along a medieval sea wall, which is about five feet high.
Surrounded by beautiful salt marsh. On my left, we're about half a mile in from
the sea. There are ponies grazing lazily along the green and ore-burned salt
marsh. And on my right, a little bit of a different picture. Plenty of mud and
ditches and rotten trees, lines and lines of them. What's going on? I'm here
with Alan Kersley-Evans from the National Trust. What happened here? We're on
the old sea wall. This used to separate salt marsh from farmland. We had some
nice green fields over here with some freshwater ditches in. Once upon a time,
this sea wall very clearly separated the two. In 2015, this sea wall started to
collapse. In line with the policy that we take in the National Trust on these
things, we decided to not intervene, to let nature take its course, to let the
sea find its own place, and just to let that happen and see how the land
responded, really. How did that decision come to be? It must have been quite a
difficult one, given the fact that nothing like this had ever happened in Wales
before. Yeah, no, it was. It was a really exciting decision to take, actually.
The day we stood here and made our plans, that was a very exciting thing to do.
You're right. In England, there's a few sites like this, but in Wales, there
hadn't been anything at all up until this point. Clearly, we're here right now
on the medieval sea wall. I imagine a number of times the sea would come surpass
it, and then it would break it down, and then you'd have to fix it again. How
many times would you have to do this? Roughly every 25 years or so, it would
need a fairly major repair, packing soil and rocks and stuff behind it, and a
little bit of concrete, rather than just the cost of the thing. It was actually
just whether it was sustainable in the future. With sea level rise, actually,
this wall would eventually have been over-topped. On a high tide, it got to be
very close to the top anyway. Although we could have kept defending this and
said, oh, we're going to hold the line, we're going to hold the line, eventually
it would have gone over the top and made a bit of a mockery of our decision. So
rather than throw good money after bad, trying to defend a thing that couldn't
be defended, we just decided to see what we could do to allow that to happen
more naturally, really. You must have been nervous when the idea not to fix this
wall, to let nature have it, was floated and then executed. That must have been
quite a worrying time. It was, especially because it was my decision to start
with, so I felt like, you know, this might be the end of my career at this
point. There was definitely a moment when the sea wall finally breached and the
seawater came in, and I stood almost exactly here on the day it did it. And it
was quite a shocking moment for this land that was farms, and fields, suddenly
was full of water. It was a big tide like today, so the water came in a long
way. That was quite a scary moment, but it was also a very proud moment, if I'm
honest. So Alan, on our right, we've got a whole line of dead trees, completely
in the middle of the salt marsh. Why don't you take me over there? Oh, we're
going right through the screlchy, marshy mud now, aren't we, Alan? Yeah, this is
what it's like all the time now, it's just permanently wet. Glad I brought my
wellies. So we've come back from the sea wall into the reclaimed land, which is
now salt marsh, and we're just heading up towards this area where we've got a
line of trees that are completely hollowed out. There's no leaves, there's
nothing on them. At first glance, it looks like something's gone horribly wrong.
Freshwater trees and grasses and stuff don't like salt water. So essentially,
when the salt water came in, the trees all died away. And actually, what we
decided to do is to not tidy that up and not to take them away to make it look
neat and tidy. One of the most important things that we've got here is that
nature's able to look after itself, essentially, and nature really hates it if
you tidy up too much. If you try and make stuff look neat and tidy, you are
basically taking away homes for insects and beetles and stuff like that, and
fungus that all live on these dead trees. They are amazing habitats in their own
right. And actually, although at first glance, you kind of think, well, what on
earth has happened? Actually, that sort of slow decay, that slow sort of
collapse into the ground is extremely important for nature. And although nobody
ever wants to say, well, we're going to kill some trees, actually, when we kind
of look at the large scheme of it and say, well, we're going to lose 50 willow
trees, but we're going to gain 40 hectares of salt marsh, in the end, that felt
like the right decision. What has that meant, having this reclaim by nature?
What has it meant for the local ecological system? It feels like quite a strange
thing to stand here, where we've got this enormous landscape off to our left,
where you can salt marsh as far as you can see, to say we need some more salt
marsh. That feels like quite an odd thing to say. But actually, globally,
nationally, salt marsh is a very, very threatened habitat. There's a real lack
of salt marsh. It's been lost over the years. Globally and nationally, that's
really important. Why is it important? The plants and the creatures that live in
salt marsh won't live anywhere else other than in a salt marsh habitat. You
can't create that in the uplands. You can't create that anywhere other than at
the sea. So these things have got a limited space where they can live anyway.
And also, from a carbon point of view, so from a climate change point of view,
salt marsh is amazing at locking up carbon. Does it feel like this is something
that nature has reclaimed? It really does. It's nice to be able to see how it
makes its own decisions. At Kermivy, the decision was effectively to stop
maintaining the seawalls and surrender the land to nature. But there are a
number of coastal sites implementing managed realignment, and someone who knows
all about it is Dr Stuart Oliver, a senior lecturer in geography at St Mary's
University, Twickenham, and author of a book called Land Abandoned to the Sea.
At the coast, what we seem to have is an appointment with the future. There
seems to be a growing recognition that we cannot fix the coast in place. We
cannot stop it from changing. Currently, there's something like 27 square
kilometres of land in Britain have been given up on 52 sites to manage
realignment. To give you some comparison, by the way, the town of Oldham is 18
square kilometres. So something like approaching two towns of Oldham has been
lost to the coast, as it were, lost to the sea. Currently, about 2% of the
British coastline has been affected by managed realignment. The plan suggested
by the Government's Committee on Climate Change is to increase from that 2% of
the coast affected by managed realignment to something like about 16% by the
year 2105. So a much greater expansion. So what we see when we look at managed
realignment sites now is an archipelago of change. Eventually, there'll be much
more of it, and eventually, much less of the coast will be protected by concrete
walls. Much more of it will be a zone in which the coast moves to and fro. So
what happens to these areas that were very often fields that had themselves been
claimed from the coast, that actually they're given back, and they go back to
being the coastal marshlands that very often they were until the medieval period
or even the early modern period, even up until the 18th, sometimes even 19th
century. It's a return to the past. What are the problems with managed
realignment? Oh, well, they're very substantial. Really, we can look at them in
terms of, I suppose, being physical problems, in terms of being political
problems, and in terms of being psychological problems as well. The physical
problems are it's a hard process to go through. It's actually hard to organize.
It's costly. It takes a great deal of time. Politically, there are problems too.
It's something which is risky, and many realignment sites have been welcomed by
much of the population, but a lot of them haven't been. Some have been actually
very unpopular indeed. That's a big risk for any political organization in terms
of local government, in terms of representatives to parliament. It's scary for
the electorate. The main problem is loss. People find this very painful. It's a
psychological barrier to managed realignment. Many people do feel much safer
when they are surrounded by what feels like solid technology, things which will
hold back a rather threatening nature. I think the idea of what happened at
Kermivi is in theory really seductive, giving the land back to nature. But when
people's homes and livelihoods are at risk, there's a whole lot more at stake,
just as there has been here in Fairbourn. Here's Georgina Salt again. It left
the people terrified about what was actually going to happen, when was it going
to happen, how imminent was it, and basically in a complete state of flux. It
was an awful thing to lay on a village. How do you feel, and people around you?
I mean, this is a small, close-knit community. When you were walking down the
street, were you having this conversation? We're still having that conversation.
People try to rally together to create an action group so that we could generate
movement, find out what's going to happen, what was going to happen to the
people. But I must say, the outcome of that has been very positive at the end of
the day. Over the last few years, what has it been like living with this, that
the village may potentially be decommissioned and people may need to have to be
relocated? What has that been like for people's mental health, their stress
levels? We've found that people have fallen into three different categories.
We've had the people that have been very worried and very scared, and one older
gentleman nearby turned around and said it was just like waiting in the war for
the Germans to arrive and constantly living with that. You then have people who
say, no, it's not going to happen, or it's not going to happen in my lifetime,
so I'm not going to bother about it. And then you get people who get really
angry about it, resentful, because places that they saved for that have been the
result of their life's work were just going to be annihilated. Let's talk a
little bit about the future. Sea levels are going to rise. Do you acknowledge
that something is going to have to be done here in Fairbourn? Fairbourn has been
salt marsh, etc., in the past. I dare say that it will result in going back to
salt marsh sometime in the future. The problem is the specifics of dates, so
we've got to take a flexible approach to things. And so, yes, in the future we
are going to lose parts of our coastline and probably Fairbourn will be part of
it, but so will many other communities as well. In a statement, Gwynedd Council
told us that although the Fairbourn Master Plan does make reference to
decommissioning with a date of 2054, in fact no formal decision has ever been
made by the Council to decommission the village. Perhaps what's happened here in
Fairbourn is a perfect example of the sensitivities and difficulties these
decisions involve, and it's attracted media attention from all over the world as
a result. Since 2013, the municipality of Gwynedd, which the village of
Fairbourn depends on, has adopted proposals to end the maintenance of the
ditches. Protecting faster sea level rises and more frequent and extreme storms
due to global warming, officials said that by 2054 it would no longer be safe or
sustainable to live in Fairbourn. The village is doomed to extinction. It's
Fairbourn that is destined to disappear due to rising sea levels. Fairbourn is
not going to be the only place where tough choices will have to be made. Paul
Sayers is the author of a report published last year called Responding to
Climate Change Around England's Coasts – The Scale of the Transformational
Challenge. He told me about the size of the problem. In some locations, we won't
be able to continue to just modify what we've been doing and just do a little
bit more of it. We will have to think about a more transformational change. And
for some communities, that may well mean relocating from the coast. When we talk
about sea levels rising, how much of the UK coastline by 2050, for example, do
you think is going to be affected, or by the end of the century? Our analysis
suggests that around about 30% of the UK's shoreline will become increasingly
difficult to maintain on its current position. And as sea levels rise, we'll
have to think about either spending increasing sums of money to maintain that
line, keep it where it is, and in doing so, really change the nature of that
shoreline. Because as sea levels rise, if we're maintaining the current position
of the shoreline, then our beaches, our salt marshes, our natural areas will get
squeezed between the hard shoreline position and the tide. How many homes do you
think would be affected here? We estimate between 120,000 and 160,000
properties, both residential and non-residential properties, not just homes,
will come under increasing pressure to think about realignment. We're not saying
they will be realigned, i.e. the coast will be realigned and they will have to
move, but a large number of properties will come under an increasing pressure to
think about how we might adapt to the coast. But at the moment, it's unclear how
we do that, and it's unclear when we will do that in our planning processes. If
we're looking at things for, say, 2050 or the end of the century, that's going
to take a lot of planning, and we need to start that pretty soon. Is that what
you're saying there? The key thing is we need to start planning now for that,
because doing a transformational change takes time, and we need to engage the
communities and support the communities about how that happens. And it can take
50 years to make that transition. It's not an overnight choice. And at the
moment, we're not having an honest debate about those locations that we will
maintain and we will defend, and those locations that we won't, and a realigned
location is needed. And where it is needed, we need to support those communities
through financial mechanisms to think about how that happens. And without that
longer-term planning, it's really hard to engage the communities to make that
transition, really hard to get the financial support in place. Finances. That's
always going to be a sticking point. And decisions about spending money will
depend on the value of the infrastructure you're paying to defend. Paul Sayers,
again. For some places, like London, for example, we'll always defend London. So
we expect large urban areas, not just London, but around the UK coast, to
continue to be protected, because one of the cost-effective approaches will be
to continue to defend those large urban areas through conventional engineered
protection. For more rural communities and more sparsely populated communities,
it will be more difficult to justify the investment in hard defence as sea
levels rise. Nobody wants to lose their house, absolutely. And at the moment,
there isn't that clarity on how we're going to maintain our defences in the long
term, or our coasts in the long term, and what kind of financial mechanisms
there are to support communities that are affected by it. What we're seeing with
the arrival of managed realignment, argues Stuart Oliver, is a return to a
previous way of thinking when it comes to our relationship with the sea. The sea
defences that we have around Britain, some of them may date from as early as
Roman times. And then during the medieval period, there was what's been called
land reclaim for need and greed. It's been called by the church, by landowners,
initially by the church in fact. From the 18th century, there's been an attempt
to apply science to control the natural world. There was a change which occurred
in European culture, really from the end of the medieval period. An attempt to
change the way in which nature was seen. And really up until perhaps around the
18th century, nature was seen as being a source of bounty. It was seen as being
something which was there to be drawn upon, something which came from the
divine, and was something which could keep the community alive. After that
period, there was an organised, increasing and organised control of the natural
world. And indeed initially it was hoped this might enable the natural world to
be brought totally under control through technological and economic solutions.
What we now have though, since the 20th century, since the late 20th century, is
the beginnings of a return to that old approach. People are having to
acknowledge that actually sometimes we have to give way. And that seems to be a
new way ahead to what extent that will be adopted and how quickly, and whether
adopted quickly enough is a different matter. Coastlines of the past, coastlines
of the future. Whatever they look like in the years ahead, one thing I know for
sure is we need to be making decisions about them right now, in the present.
Casting the Earth was presented by Casa Alam, the producer was Emma Campbell. We
turn the spotlight on the people making the news in the media show, that's
coming up next. Then at 10 o'clock we have analysis of today's main news, that's
In the World Tonight. Let's hear more now from James Gumarasamy. Thanks Neil.
After the FBI director says it's most likely that Covid-19 was created in a lab,
we speak to one of the scientists who went to China on a World Health
Organisation fact-finding mission and reached a different conclusion, and to a
former US national security official who is convinced there has been a Chinese
cover-up. Africa's most populous nation gets a new leader, we profile Nigeria's
president-elect. One of the nations of the United Kingdom is about to get a new
leader, we hear how three would-be First Ministers of Scotland fared at their
first hustings, and a French counter-cultural icon gets a retrospective. Many
thanks James Gumarasamy. This is BBC Radio 4, now here's Ros Atkins with The
Media Show. Hello and welcome. Well today we're going back to 2020. First we
have what The Telegraph's calling the lockdown files, thousands of WhatsApp
messages that former Health Secretary Matt Hancock sent and received. He gave
them to the journalist Isabel Oakeshott so she could help write his book about
the pandemic. Now they've been given to The Telegraph by Isabel Oakeshott. It's
raising questions about the government's decision-making during the pandemic and
it's also raising questions about journalistic ethics. Next we have the FBI
which this week said it believes the most likely explanation of how the pandemic
started is a lab leak in China, an idea that back in 2020 was dismissed by some
as a conspiracy theory. We'll look at how the media handled that idea at the
time. And we're learning a lot about how Fox News handled Donald Trump's false
claims that the 2020 US election was stolen. We'll talk about that too. Let's
start though with The Daily Telegraph's Camilla Tomminy speaking on The World at
One earlier about the paper's decision to publish those messages of Matt
Hancock's. When you've been presented with 2.3 million words and you can see the
rapidity and regularity with which messages were pinged on WhatsApp that then
informed major decision-making then we think there's a legitimate public
interest for the public to know what was said at the time in these messages.
With me in the Media Studio studio is Heather Brooke, a British-American
journalist, a freedom of information campaigner and a former professor of
journalism at City University. And Heather, you worked on the MP's expenses
story with The Daily Telegraph in 2009. You also worked on the WikiLeaks story
that The Guardian published some years afterwards. In the case of this cache of
messages, would you have published? I would have to see them all but yes, I
think there's such a great public interest in knowing, having a real-time
account of when those decisions were being made. And they've done it in a
seemingly responsible way. They haven't just dumped it all out on the Internet.
They have gone through it. I mean, my main question is what did they leave out
and what were the political motivations for this to even come out in the first
place? Because I feel like there is some underlying story, the story behind the
story about how these came into to be published in the first place. Well, Matt
Hancock touches on some of those issues in a statement. He said these stolen
messages have been doctored to create a false story that Matt rejected clinical
advice on care home testing. This is flat wrong, it says a statement on behalf
of Matt Hancock, which begs the question, why would you not put all the messages
out if you had them rather than selectively pick them, which leaves you open to
this kind of criticism? Yeah, I mean, it's a common criticism that you get when
you do publish is that you've either manipulated facts or left things out. And
if Matt Hancock, being the original owner of these messages, he in fact
downloaded them all and gave them to Isabel Oakeshott. So hers are a copy. If he
wants to correct the record, there's nothing to stop him from doing that. He
could you know, he can just publish the full account of those messages if he
wants to. But you don't have concerns about the fact that he downloaded and gave
those messages to Isabel Oakeshott for the purposes of writing a book, not for
the purposes of putting them in the daily telegraph. I would say that's a
different that's a different conversation. There's like two two ethical issues
here. One is the ethics of publishing them. Do they have a strong public
interest? And I think the answer to that is yes. And then the other thing is the
journalist herself, that she has basically betrayed a source. And that's, you
know, that's something that she needs to think about herself to be like morally
square with herself. But then also there are these I mean, it's a tricky thing
because, you know, for journalists, especially investigative journalists, source
protection is such a an important value. So to if your source gives you
something and then you, you know, you sort of betray that trust, that that is an
issue that I would want to, you know, I think needs more conversation. And it's
not the first time that Isabel Oakeshott has been in this situation before with
source protection. Well, Isabel Oakeshott anticipated some of these questions
coming her way because she's published a long article in the Daily Telegraph
along with the story. Here's just one paragraph from it. She says, already the
Covid inquiry is mired in a secrecy row as lawyers busy themselves redacting
civil servants names from thousands of documents. By the time all those being
paid vast sums of taxpayers money to protect reputations are finished, it's not
hard to imagine the whole thing may become a colossal whitewash. She makes the
case for simply getting this information out there because people deserve to see
it. Yeah, it's a good case to make. And certainly it's true that our public
inquiries in Britain take forever. They are always sort of a way to put
something into the long grass and not, you know, for everybody who who is sort
of materially responsible has already moved on by the time that these inquiries
have a concluding result. Well, Heather, let's bring in Vivian Schiller,
executive director of Aspen Digital, which is part of the Aspen Institute. She's
also a former president and CEO of National Public Radio in the US. She's held
senior roles at Twitter, CNN, New York Times, NBC and others. Vivian, welcome to
the media show. I guess let's start with the same question I asked Heather.
Would you have published? Yeah, well, I have yes with some caveats. I have some
concerns. Look, it's newsworthy. There is a separate issue about the ethics of
her protecting her source that I think we can talk about that. But that's a
separate topic. Newsworthy. It is responsibility of news organizations to to
publish newsworthy information. It's certainly newsworthy. But here's my two
concerns. First of all, in terms of she did not release the entire cache of
documents. One might say that there is, you know, confidential information to be
protected, you know, that needs to be protected. And in the hands of a
responsible journalist, I would be more comfortable with publishing as a news
organization, publishing select excerpts, except she clearly has an agenda. And
so she is not a so-called neutral journalist. She even if you read her story
about why she did it, she uses phrases like people being imprisoned in their
homes. She's got a point of view. She's got an agenda. But hold on. Don't all
journalists and all news organizations in their own way have one agenda or
another? Well, yes, of course, we're human beings and we all have biases. But
she's she but she has explicitly said that she believes that the lockdown
efforts are not casting judgment on this. But she has specifically said that
she's come down with a very strong point of view on a very controversial issue
and then has presented evidence that supports her point of view, which doesn't
give me much trust. Yeah, I would agree because I've I've followed her career a
little bit. I don't know everything about it, but she's basically, I feel, is
not a neutral journalist. Well, I'm sure she would absolutely deny that
description. She's justified her decision. But the other thing I should say is
it's not Isabel Oakeshott who's publishing this. It's The Daily Telegraph. She
hasn't put it on a blog of hers or posted them out as tweets. She's gone through
one of the biggest newspapers in this country who have put it on their front
page. And so it's been through The Daily Telegraph's editorial processes. And as
such, we should be judging The Telegraph as well as the journalist, shouldn't
we? Yeah, I agree. And what I was going to say that we are also there are
politics underneath the story. And it feels to me, I mean, some stories you can
really sense that there's sort of an empirical bedrock of the story. And then
other ones come out with quite a heavy political spin on them. And this one
struck me as having quite a heavy political spin. I'm glad it's out there. It's
certainly incredibly important to the public, but I would have preferred it to
not have such a such a spin. But when you were working on the WikiLeaks story,
which came out via The Guardian and other media organisations around the world,
you and others involved chose to include some things and chose to not include
others. And there were political ramifications of doing that, too, weren't
there? Yeah, there always is. I mean, if you're making decisions about what to
publish and what not to publish, you have to. Yeah, you're deciding those
things. But I guess what I would say is the reasons for those decisions are
transparent. You know, the reason we didn't publish all of the WikiLeaks
diplomatic cables, like as a dump, is because we could say there's actually
quite a lot of security information that shows where, you know, that shows where
troops are, that shows where people that talk to the American government are and
they're in hostile countries, their lives would generally be in danger. So
that's why we're keeping that out. I don't know what the what the criteria were
for redactions of these lockdown files. Well, I suspect it's not the last time
we'll hear about them. And I'm sure through the week and beyond, The Daily
Telegraph will be doing more to explain its thinking. By the way, you can listen
back on BBC Sounds to hear the full interview with Camilla Tominy from The Daily
Telegraph, which was on The World at One. Heather, thank you very much indeed
for being with us on the media show. We appreciate it. That's Heather Brooke.
Vivian Schiller is staying with us. And we're going to turn to another story
now, which also roots back to 2020. This is a Wall Street Journal exclusive this
weekend that the US Energy Department has concluded that the pandemic most
likely arose from a lab leak in China. Then we've seen in the news today, the
FBI's director has said that the FBI has drawn a similar conclusion. Now, go
back to 2020. And that idea was in some quarters referred to as a conspiracy
theory. So let's consider how the media handled this particular idea. First of
all, Paul McNukey is here, senior editor for global health security and
campaigns at The Telegraph. Now, good to see you, Paul. Thanks for coming in.
Thank you. And we should be clear, we invited you before the lockdown files
landed and you're not here to talk about that. But I just wonder what's it like
being in a newsroom, in a news organisation when a story of this scale comes
along? Do you know it's coming for starters? Well, I didn't know it was coming,
but very exciting is the answer. It's a great scoop and a great scoop, I think,
in the public interest. But I don't know the detail of how it was put together.
Well, as I was saying, you're not here to talk specifically about Matt Hancock.
But you'll remember as well as I do that if we go back towards the beginning of
the pandemic, there were sections of the media who were not at all comfortable
talking about the lab leak theory. Some were just saying we shouldn't be
touching this. What are your memories of how that issue was handled at the time?
Looking back, I think actually that narrative isn't quite right. My memory is
that the lab leak hypothesis was pushed out quite early by spooks in the States
to the Wall Street Journal and other American papers. So I think it's been there
pretty much since the beginning, if we really go back. And I think that the US
intelligence agencies, which have been charged with considering where the virus
came from, have actually done quite a good job. You know, there are six or seven
of these agencies. They produced a report under an umbrella title 18 months ago.
And this is an update on that. Do you worry, though, that the nuances of the
conclusions being drawn by these different American bodies is being lost as it
turns into reports in the media? Yes, I do. I think that some of the reporting
of it is pretty poor. So, for example, the energy organisation has come to its
conclusion, but it says itself that it does so with low confidence. And that
means in its own words that the data it's relying on is scant, questionable,
fragmented or in a state such that solid analytical conclusions cannot be
inferred from it. And so let's explore this information point where
intelligence, science and journalism collide. You're going to stay with us, but
let me bring in Tim Caulfield, professor of health, law and science policy at
the University of Alberta in Canada. Professor Caulfield is also an author and a
TV host. And, Professor, you have in some ways straddled the media in the
academic world on this particular issue. I wonder, as you saw journalists and
the media grappling with ideas like the lab leak, what your impressions were.
Yeah, I very much agree with Paul. You know, I think there's been this
fascinating revision of how this debate has played out, because there's really a
number of streams going on here. There's the scientific story and how scientists
have grappled with this. And in general, and I want to be careful here, this is
complex, most scientists still lean natural cause, right? They still lean
natural cause. And then you have, you know, these agencies that have come out in
the United States that have grappled with this too. And they're saying, hey,
this is complex. And what is it, two out of five now are leaning lab leak. The
others are still leaning natural or saying there's no consensus. Right. And then
you have how the media has been portraying this. And yeah, it has been less than
ideal. And again, I agree with Paul. I found it kind of fascinating how you have
this one report from one agency that is based on sort of low confidence. And
then we come to the fourth category. And those are politicians. And they're
saying, look, we win. Our team wins. You know, there was a lab leak. We should
never have been. It should never have been said that this was a conspiracy
theory. So it is really fascinating to see these four streams and their others
out there kind of grapple with what is really complex and important. I think
that that should be highlighted to science. And we haven't done a great job. You
know, we've just sort of fueled this polarization. And unfortunately, I don't
think it's going to go away. I do want to add one more element if I could here.
I think there has been a conflation between the bioweapon conspiracy theory and
the eye, which, by the way, all the agencies say it is a conspiracy theory. It
wasn't a bioweapon. Really, that that has been framed, rightly or not, as as
being inaccurate and the lab leak theory. But but for sure, early days, we did
not handle this well from a science communication perspective. As some of the
dynamics which you describe played out in 2020 and since, one of the
journalistic responses to this has been fact checking, guiding us through the
pandemic with clear fact checking where possible. And also here in the studio is
Pippa Allen Kinross, news and online editor from Full Fact. Hi, Pippa. Thanks
for for being with us. How did you handle this one back in 2020? This was a very
difficult one. I think it was really obvious, really right from the start of
2020 that we were not going to have evidence to talk about this. And, you know,
we we don't pretend to be a team of experts that know everything about
everything. We have to rely on the best evidence that is available when we fact
check something. And I think it's easy to forget now how how much was changing
in the early days of the pandemic, how much evidence was coming out, which would
later get replaced by other evidence and other evidence as we went through. So,
you know, we we did look at these claims. But sorry, let me interrupt you,
because this is the nub of it, isn't it? In that the way that science handles
something, that it collects evidence, it collects more evidence and its position
evolves. While as if you're fact checking, that suggests a degree of certainty
that perhaps the science wasn't able to offer. I think one of the most important
things that we do in fact checking people obviously are keen to have a this is
true or this is false. And that's quite often not something we're able to give
on a variety of topics. But one of the really important things to do is to
express uncertainty where uncertainty exists and to be really clear about the
limits of the evidence we're able to give. So back in sort of March 2020, when
we were starting to write about these things, we could say this is the best
evidence we have available at the moment, but this is not certain. And I think
being clear about what is not certain is really important to this conversation
as well. So that's how you were approaching it. But, Paul, I wonder whether one
of the other dynamics here was that there was so much poor information about
COVID flying around that scientists, academics, journalists and others were so
keen to jump on information that was wrong and say, no, no, no, don't believe
this. That sometimes information that was worthy of further attention was being
unfairly labelled in that way. I think that's right. I think Pippa's point about
people craving certainty is quite a big problem. And it's a problem for the
media, too, because this question is really about probabilities. You know,
what's more probable? And I think that there's a fantastic story in it which is
explainable and understandable by readers with all sorts of twists and levels of
evidence. But if people simply want to write this is true or that is true, we
get ourselves into this very difficult position where people start to lose trust
in the media and what is being said. Professor Cawford, let's bring you in here.
Yeah, I agree with what both my colleagues said, and the data on this is kind of
fascinating, actually, because research has shown that that the public says, I
want to know about uncertainty. Be honest with me. Be transparent with me. But
when you do that, you know, you may not get that signal through the noise.
Right. So you want to have the splashy headline. You want to have the the
content that is shareable on on social media that often, unfortunately, skews to
the dogmatic. It skews to the definitive when the reality is it's it's very,
very uncertain. So, yeah, people crave both uncertainty. I mean, they crave
certainty. But when you ask them, they say they want you to be honest about
about the uncertainty. And I believe we can do both. I agree with Paul. I think
we can make compelling, compelling content that is true to the science. Vivian
Schiller from the Aspen Institute, let's bring you in because you and your
colleagues have a huge amount of information about not just how the media
handles disinformation, but how we all handle it as consumers. Right. Well, I
want to just talk about the media response to this, because everything that
everybody said, I agree with. But I'm looking at the headline of The Wall Street
Journal article that broke the news about the Energy Department. This is before
the FBI came in and the headline I'm reading it is LabLeak Most Likely Origin of
COVID-19 Pandemic Energy Department Now Says. You have to go scroll down the
article to discover that the disclaimer is they have a low, quote, low level of
confidence. I found that to be a very irresponsible headline, given low level of
confidence and given the context of people looking to, you know, of our
polarized world where people are looking to cast blame on the media and sort of
get make sure that their side wins, which nobody wins in this situation. And
just finally on this subject, Professor Caulfield, what about this idea that
both scientists and journalists are so concerned about giving oxygen to
conspiracy theories that sometimes they unfairly label something as such when in
fact it's worthy of further explanation and exploration? Yeah, this, this is a
real challenge. You know, we've done a lot of research around the idea of false
balance, which, to be honest with you, throughout the pandemic was a bigger
issue than, in other words, giving too much oxygen to fringe ideas than the
other issue of not taking things seriously. And the the lead leak theory, as
Paul noted, you know, it has been covered pretty consistently for the last two
years. Early days, I think, early days, we're talking early 2020, and it was
more of this concern. But we were in the beginning of a pandemic. I do think
what we can do is use what's called a weight of evidence approach, where you
highlight that there are these views out there. But right now, right now, the
body of evidence tells us it's another story. It sounds similar to the approach
that Full Fact took then and is taking now. And Professor Caulfield, we'll leave
it there on this. Thank you very much. Thanks to to Pippa Allen Kinross from
Full Fact and Paul Newkey from The Telegraph. Now, we are reflecting there on
that being a story where media politics, ideology, journalism all connect.
Here's another story where that has been happening, because in the US, Dominion
Voting Systems has brought a defamation case against Fox News. It relates to how
the network covered Donald Trump's claims about the 2020 election being stolen,
which, of course, is a claim not backed up by available evidence. Eric Wemple,
The Washington Post columnist and media critic, has been covering this story.
And Eric, the reason we invited you on was because this defamation case has
revealed a great deal about the inner workings of Fox News. Just tell us what
we've learned. Eric obviously can't hear us, or if he can, we can't hear him.
Vivian, you've also been following this. And in this, these details, we saw the
Fox News executives were really debating hard how to cover these claims when
clearly some of them had major doubts about those claims. I mean, I think that
what was revealed was not surprising, but it was nonetheless shocking to hear so
plainly the executives and the anchors clearly acknowledging that the rigged
election was nonsense and they didn't believe in it. And very plainly saying we
can't cover the truth that we know because we will lose audience and we will
lose money was, you know, just really confirmed what many of us have suspected.
But it's just that the level of cynicism and damage that causes is just deeply,
deeply shocking. Well, on the lawsuit, Fox News says Dominion's lawsuit has
always been more about what will generate headlines than what can withstand
legal and factual scrutiny, as illustrated by them now being forced to slash
their fanciful damages demand by more than half a billion dollars after their
own expert debunked its implausible claims. And of course, we'll have to see how
that defamation lawsuit plays out. But nonetheless, it was an insight, wasn't
it? Not just to the dynamic within Fox, but also the fact that Rupert Murdoch,
by his own admission, likes to stay involved in the journalism of the companies
which he owns. Yeah, indeed. And I think Eric has audio now, so he may want to
jump in on that. Eric, are you there? OK. Yes, I'm here. Fantastic. Please tell
us more about what we've learned from these messages about the detailed
discussions within Fox on this issue. Well, the detailed discussions within Fox
about its coverage of the stolen election claims and so on and so forth
basically indicate that Fox basically didn't believe a lot of the programming
that they were broadcasting simply because, well, they wanted to keep their
audience. And they knew that their audience would leave them if they tilted too
far toward the truth. And they saw their audience once this issue of the stolen
election claim became a real sort of like top run news issue or the news issue
in the United States. They saw their audience starting to migrate towards other
more, even more right wing cable news outlets, and they panicked. They just
freaked out and decided, well, what do we got to do? We need to toe the line. We
need to thread the needle. We need to do some sort of balancing act to keep
their audience at Fox News. And this is understandable behavior for an outlet
that only had its ratings to show for it. Fox News doesn't really ever break
news. Fox News doesn't do particularly good analysis. They don't have any huge
scoops. All they have ever had is audience. So when you lose your audience, you
lose everything. You don't think, though, that and we've heard this before from
Fox representatives, that there's a distinction between its opinion programming
and its news programming. That's a distinction that sometimes argued that the
news programming plays it straight while opinion people are given more leeway to
express themselves. I think there is a distinction between the news program and
the opinion programming, but that doesn't that's not a get out of free get out
of jail free card. Look, the opinion programming is stuff that really damages
the country. The news programming is just basically conservatively tilted
discussion and topics and so on and so forth. If Brett Baer, you know, the main
news person at Fox News, if Brett Baer, for example, were all the Fox News
broadcast, our country would be in a much better position. I will say also that,
you know, the fact that they are these so-called opinion commentators weren't
actually expressing their opinion, as we now know, because of the because of the
text messages, they were expressing what they thought they needed to do to keep
their audience, which I am not a defamation lawyer, but the experts are weighing
in that this is about as powerful evidence as has been seen in a very, very high
bar case to win still. Just very quickly, Eric, as we come to the end of the
program, what happens next in the case? How long do we wait until we get to the
end of this story? Well, so they're now going through back and forth a lot of
filings, both sides have filed for summary judgment, which which seeks a
judgment from the judge in their favor. They have oral arguments on March 21st.
The trial is set to start on April 17th unless they reach a settlement of some
sort. And, you know, they really haven't had any settlement talks as far as I
can see. So we're looking at basically a five week trial. It would be a real
tedious undertaking, too, because it would be just a lot of people where where
the plaintiffs are trying to establish their state of mind, what they knew, what
they said. So this could be a really interesting and tedious. Eric, thank you
for describing it. Fox has criticized the defamation motion, saying it would
prevent journalists from basic reporting in their efforts to publicly smear Fox
for covering and commenting on allegations by a sitting president should be
recognized for what it is. With that, thanks to Heather, Paul, Tim, Pippa,
Vivian and Eric. The media show is available as ever through BBC Sounds and
we'll be back with you next week. The media show was presented by Ross Atkins
and the producer was Helen Fitz Henry. The world tonight is coming up shortly.
Before that, let's take a look at the forecast tonight. Northern Scotland, along
with southern England and parts of the Midlands, will see skies become clear,
allowing a frost to develop for some southern Scotland, northern Ireland, Wales
and the rest of England. We'll hold on to cloudier skies with a few light
showers continuing tomorrow. Southern England, Wales and the north and west of
Scotland will have a dry day with spells of sunshine. Northern Ireland, northern
England and the remainder of Scotland will still see large areas of cloud and a
few showers. It'll be less breezy than recent days. Friday and Saturday will
start frosty for some, but it'll continue mostly dry with variable cloud on FM,
on longwave and on radio. And on.