TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Find out in a documentary by ChatGPT next Monday evening at 8 o'clock on Radio
4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at two o'clock. The third and final report from the
inquiry into the Manchester arena bombing in 2017 is due to be published about
now. 22 people were killed at an Ariana Grande concert. This final report will
deal with what the intelligence services knew about the bomber Salman Abedi
prior to the attack. Boris Johnson has warned he will find it very difficult to
vote for Rishi Sunak's new Brexit deal because in his words this is not about
the UK taking back control. Delivering a speech in central London the former
Prime Minister said he would continue to campaign for what he thought of as
Brexit. I'm going to find it very difficult to vote for something myself because
there's something like this myself because I believed that we should have done
something different no matter how much plaster came off the ceiling in Brussels
and I hope that it will work and I also hope that if it doesn't work we will
have the guts to deploy that bill again. The British Medical Association's
junior doctor representatives have held a meeting with the health secretary
Steve Barclay to discuss their dispute about pay. They said nothing new was
offered and described the talks as disappointing. The former deputy commissioner
of the Metropolitan Police has been referred to the police watchdog after
allegations he spoke of rape complaints as regretful sex. Sir Stephen Howe
strongly denies making the comments. Rail workers in Greece are holding a day of
strike action in protest at the train crash earlier this week which killed 42
people. A new transport minister has been appointed after the resignation of his
predecessor in the aftermath of the disaster. And archaeologists in Egypt have
described finding a hidden corridor in the Great Pyramid of Giza as the most
important discovery of the century. They said the corridor is around 30 feet
long and was likely built to relieve some of the weight of the pyramid. BBC
News. In 15 minutes on Radio 4, the finale of our series charting how in just 13
years Adolf Hitler led a fringe sect with a few, the hundred members, to become
the dominant force in German politics. Today we've reached January 1933 and
political grandees grant Hitler the chancellorship believing it will box him in.
That's Nazis, the road to power at a quarter past two. First on Radio 4, another
chance to catch St David's Day celebrations in Ambridge. It's the Archers. Pat
was saying it's been a very different St David's Day this year. Is it St David's
Day? First of March. Oh, it completely passed me by. That's understandable,
Tony. Pat usually makes a big thing of it, doesn't she? Particularly since
Natasha came on the scene. Yeah, your shop's looking quite bare. I mean,
compared to previous years. No decorations, no special offers. Pat often cooks
as a traditional cowl too. She said she's been putting her energy into making
things for the funeral buffet instead. Yes. I'm doing the same. That's good of
you, Susan. That's the least I can do. We all want the day to go as well as
possible. Thank you. Oh, it's a terrible time for everyone, but it's nice to
have something to focus on. Neil's applied to become a volunteer guide at Lower
Loxley. Oh, yes. I'll tell you what's a godsend for me. Having livestock. The
cattle always need looking after no matter what else is happening. That's true.
When John died, they pretty much saved my sanity. Sorry to bother you, Tony.
Have you got a minute? Afternoon, Susan. Hello. Of course. What's up? I need to
talk to you about the funeral. You'd better get back to the dairy, hadn't you,
Susan? Oh, well, actually, Pat asked me to pop into the house first. Okay. She's
trying to sort out a problem with the till. Oh, it's not the printer again, is
it? I think so. Anyway, I said I'd check on Jack and Henry for her. Oh, thanks.
Bye, Lillian. I'll see you Friday. Yes, yes. Bye, Susan. What can I do for you,
then? It's this tribute to Jenny. Now that Kate's decided it'll be too much for
her, the whole family's in a bit of turmoil about it. Well, I hope people aren't
being hard on Kate. Oh, no, no, no, not at all. Everyone knows it's a big ask.
It was actually quite brave of her to admit she was having problems. Yes. But no
one else has put themselves forward to take it over. Well, I think the answer's
obvious. Is it? You should do it. Me? You'd be ideal. You've got the warmth, the
wit, the personal touch. You're not trying to soft-soap me, are you, Tony? Not
at all. I can't think of anyone more qualified. Do you really think that?
Honestly. I just know you'd do her justice. Well, if the others are okay with
it... I'm sure they will be. In that case, how can I say no? Susan! Oh, hello,
Lee. I've just been checking on your boys. Have you? Pat asked me to. She was
tied up in the shop. Oh, thanks. They're doing fine. Oh, brilliant. Jack! Henry!
It's time to go home! Helen's away at a meeting with a potential customer. Oh,
yes, I know. Oh, of course you would. In Ludlow. So I'm cooking tea tonight.
Lee, while I've got you... Yeah? Have you heard about this electric charging
station? Of course. It's a pretty hot topic around here. Isn't it a terrible
idea? Er, I'm not sure I'd go that far. Surely you're not in favour? Climate
change is a massive problem. Nobody round here has an electric car. They do.
Who? Ardill. Ardill? Grey Gables. No, real villagers, I mean. Oh, I'd like to go
electric as soon as I can afford it. But you'll just charge that at home, won't
you? Not everyone can do that. I still don't see why they have to have this
thing slap in the middle of Umbridge. Have you seen the leaflet the gym's done?
Oh, it's cold out there. Hey, Tony. Were you at the Laurels today, Lee? Nope,
hospital today. I was wondering how Ben's getting on. He had a fairly tough
start. Yeah, I know Ruth and David are worried about him. Oh, I'm sure they are.
Can't be long now until your girls leave for America, Lee. Yeah, three weeks.
I'm dreading it. Oh, I bet you are. But anyway... Anyway, thanks for looking in
on the boys, Susan. Mustn't keep you from the dairy any longer. Oh. Clary must
be missing you, especially with Helen away for the afternoon. Oh, yes, I suppose
I'd better get back. Thanks again for looking in, Susan. No problem. Anytime.
Bye. It's going to be a real wrench, I know. It is, but I really don't want to
burden you with it, Tony. Oh, my loss doesn't make your pain any the less. It's
just so far away. If they were ill or hurt, it would take me so long to get to
California. Lee, I know how you're feeling. I remember when Helen was on remand,
not being able to be there when she needed us. That must have been awful. It
was. Unbearable. But I'm pretty sure they're going to be happy in their new
home. It'll still be hard for you, but wherever they are, they'll always be your
daughters. No one can take that away from you. Thank you, Tony. That's... Hi!
Oh, hello. Helen! Surprise! You're early. I thought you said you'd be back after
six. Well, the meeting was much quicker than I thought. Weren't they interested?
No, they were. Completely on board. Oh, great. I was going to do the rounds at
the other food shops, but I really wanted to get back to give you some support,
Dad. Oh, that's nice. It is, but actually, your dad's been supporting me. Come
in. Tony, it's me again. I hope I'm not disturbing. Pat said you were going
through some old photos. No, no, that's fine. Sit yourself down. I, uh... I
wondered if she meant the slides that we were looking at last week. Oh, no, this
is a different lot. I found an old packet of prints at the back of a drawer.
Anything the matter? It's this... It's this blessed tribute. I've been trying to
make a start on it for hours, but I'm completely stuck. You mean you've got,
um... What do they call it? A writer's block? No, not exactly. It's not that I
can't think of things I'd like to say. It's actually quite the opposite. It's
more that there's so much to say. Yes. Jenny was such a character. How do you
condense 70-odd years into a few minutes? Hmm. Could you not pick one or two
elements and concentrate on the other? Yeah, well, I'll probably have to, but
this is the point. Which ones? I mean, one of the things that made her who she
was is how strongly she reacted to really serious life events. Like Brian's run-
in with Joe Grundy's BSE cow. She basically ran the farm for months, didn't she?
But it goes back much further than that. Remember when she fell pregnant with
Adam? And refused point-blank to say who the father was. Yeah, yeah, and then
she got pregnant with a boy. Who the father was. Yeah, in the face of enormous
pressure, determined to bring him up alone. Yeah, and of course... Hmm. Oh,
yeah. That's the biggest thing of all. Taking on Rory after Siobhan died. I
mean, that's monumental, but can I touch on it? And if so, how? When Brian and
Rory will be sitting there in the front row. Oh, I can see your problem. I'm
just completely stuck, I'm afraid. Hmm. Would a gin and tonic help? Well, I've
never known a time when a gin and tonic didn't help. Oddly enough, I feel the
same about a pint. I'll sort us out some drinks, shall I? You are an angel. Oh,
while I'm doing that, why don't you take a look at those photos? I don't think
people have any conception of how big this thing is going to be. It's a two-acre
site and they're planning 30 charging points. Are you sure you don't want a hand
with that? Plus other parking. I know, you cooked. That's another 20-odd spaces,
Leigh. That might be what the company's putting in the planning application. It
doesn't mean it'll be accepted. These things are often toned down, aren't they?
It's still going to be a terrible eyesore. They'll probably do a lot of
landscaping to soften it. But what about the lights? Blaring out all day and
night. Not all day, surely. That wouldn't be very green. Sorry, Helen. I haven't
seen people this upset since the Root B fiasco. Don't remind me. Anyway, there's
Jim's leaflet. It tells you all the facts, including the things the company
doesn't want you to know. I promise you I will read it thoroughly. There's lots
more on the Facebook group, including details of the meeting at the book. I'm
sure there is. OK, then, I'll leave you to your eating. Let me see you out. I
know the way. I'll see you tomorrow, Helen. Yeah, bye. You did a good job of
staying out of that. I've heard it all before, that's why. If it's not that,
it's her summer house. I didn't know she had a summer house. Give it time. I
mean, I can see both sides. I'm just finding it hard to get involved at the
moment. You're thinking about the girls, aren't you? Yeah. They've been very
quiet. Dragging me down all the time. Look, I was going to wait a while before
saying this, because I need to do some more research, but I've been looking at
flights to San Francisco. What? I think we should book some time to go over
there, later in the year. No, Helen. It would mean you've got something to look
forward to. Help soften the blow a bit. Well, yes, that would be lovely. And
when I say we, I mean all four of us. Jack and Henry too. We can't afford it. I
know it would be expensive, but... Lee, you've made some huge sacrifices.
Agreeing to the girls going, deciding not to move there yourself. Don't you
think you deserve this? That's a very kind way to put it, but it would be a huge
amount of money. Well, I'm sure we can save up over the next few months.
Especially if we can promise the boys a special holiday. For a trip like that,
we're talking... well, probably more than my car cost. I don't care. Would you
like to go and see Mabel and Evie in America? So it's going to happen? Even if I
have to cash in an ISA or something? What? You are amazing. I just want you to
be happy. I love you so much. We look so sweet, Ninus. Butter wouldn't melt.
Where do you think that is? I'm pretty sure it's Cornwall. There's one in there
of me eating an enormous pasty. Oh, was that Paul Perrault there? It must have
been. We scared the life out of poor Jenny. When I pretended to fall off the
cliff. Poor girl. What a cruel thing to do. It was your idea. Only because there
was a soft ledge to land on. Don't mind me. And her face when you popped your
head up. I think I left a folder in here when we collected the boys. What's that
then? Just something I'm thinking about for the dairy and cheese room. So, what
were you laughing about? Oh, just a wicked trick we played on your Aunty
Jennifer. In our defence, we were quite little. We've been looking at old
holiday photos. And it's really helped us with this tribute. We've decided it
should focus on Jennifer as our sister. That's our unique perspective, after
all. That's lovely. I feel much happier now I've got a theme to work around. I'm
so pleased. And not only that, but I've just had an idea for a tweak to the
proceedings. Have you? Hmm. I think Jenny would wholeheartedly approve. More
from the archers at seven, when Chelsea will be spinning a good historical yarn.
Well, 20th century history next this afternoon here on Radio 4, with the finale
of our drama charting the rise of Hitler. And then at three o'clock, we're off
to the Forest of Dean. Claire Balding will be out walking with an art group in
today's Ramblings. Explore the worlds of arts and culture on Front Row. The
atmosphere changes. The hair starts to stand up on the back of your neck. The
biggest news and interviews. It was an absolute dream of mine to perform on a
stage. Alongside live discussions, debates and the latest reviews. She's a
series of contrasts which I thought were quite fascinating. I loathed it. I
can't recommend it enough because it's so thoroughly entertaining. Join Samira
Ahmed and me, Tom Sutcliffe, for Front Row. You are a national treasure. No.
Live every Monday to Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15. And you can listen to
past episodes on BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4, the finale of Nazis, The Road to
Power. Based on extensive research from documents and diaries of key witnesses,
it dramatises the rise of the Nazis under Adolf Hitler, an unknown army corporal
at the end of the First World War, who within 13 years would become Chancellor
of all Germany. Dateline, Berlin. From your special correspondent, Sefton
Delmer. Oskar von Hindenburg, son of the President, has met Adolf Hitler. I have
to say, I was rather taken with Herr Hitler. Talks a damn lot of sense,
actually. Herr Hitler has met Oskar von Hindenburg. God help us. Young Oskar
must be the personification of stupidity. Which is why he's been sent to Berlin.
Which means that Herr von Papen, recently dethroned Chancellor, can return to
President Hindenburg with his latest scheme to regain power. Poor Hitler, he's a
victim of his own rhetoric. He doesn't mean half of what he says. And the other
half, sir, I think we can tame him. With me as Vice-Chancellor, with the right
to be present for all his meetings, he'll be Chancellor in name only. Hitler as
Chancellor, never. Unthinkable. Sorry, Franz. It falls to Joachim von
Ribbentrop, Hitler's new wheel oiler, to break the news to his boss. Really,
that was not at all pleasant, Tom. The President wouldn't consider it. Even with
von Papen as Vice-Chancellor, to keep an eye on him. Not even. Where's Adolf
now? And according to high-level sources, Herr Hitler is now said to be sulking
in his tent in Munich. Nazis. The Road to Power. Part 8. Make Germany Great
Again. It's Sunday, the 22nd of January, 1933. Eight days until a new parliament
must sit, on Monday the 31st. And Germany is in the midst of a major political
crisis. The German Chancellor, Franz von Papen, is the first. And Germany is no
closer to a government capable of governing. The new Chancellor of Germany,
General Schleicher, still dreams of forming a government by compromising with
the socialist wing of the National Socialist Party. The former Chancellor, Franz
von Papen, will engineer any compromise that triggers the downfall of the
current Chancellor. He refuses to entertain the idea of Hitler as Chancellor.
But meanwhile, his son, Oskar, has switched camps. Along with his old friend,
Hermann Göring, he's eager to help the Nazis form a coalition with the German
National Party. You undervalue yourself, Herr Hugenberg. I am not interested in
simply acting as a make-weight in someone else's cabinet. No, no, no, given all
your business concerns... All your factories, your newspapers... All you really
have in mind is a post overseeing all matters economic. Ah, your so-called
Führer was far from amenable last time he and I attempted an alliance. There
were other issues at play during... He didn't even stay for the banquet! He's...
Made some specious remark about not eating while his stormtroopers went without.
He's a vegetarian. Did you know? A what? That's why he didn't stay. He's been
defeated. That's all. Oh, oh! Herr Hugenberg, the president is seeking a cabinet
of national concentration, and there is no question your 51 members of
parliament would play an indispensable part. He's given up on Schleicher?
Schleicher's started talking about Prussian estates again. You know the
scandals. So-called scandals. Has a man no sense? I'm honestly starting to
wonder if this is a genuine scandal. It's a flat-out insult, that's what it is.
Thank you, gentlemen. I shall take this to my members. But when Hugenberg comes
back on Wednesday the 25th... I am sorry. My party cannot accept a Nazi as
minister for Prussia. What have you not understood, Hugenberg? That position is
not negotiable. It would give your people control of 70% of all serving police
officers in Germany. We promised our voters to restore order. You're the people
creating the disorder! It's your brown-shirt thugs running up and down the
streets. We shouldn't protect ourselves from communists. The Prussian police
force amounts to 50,000 men. Well armed. Half the size of the army. But riddled
with Marxists, it must be purged. Oh, indeed. Surely you see the sense in that.
Would this... My party would like to see one of ours as state secretary in the
chancellery and one of ours as press spokesman. That is ridiculous. Let's hear
him out. I cannot believe I came back from Munich to listen to these fantastical
whimsies. 11 million people voted for us to take power, Hugenberg! Do you
require our support or not? Not at that price, no. Thank you for your time, Herr
Hitler. Gentlemen. That's it! I'm going back to Munich. I will not be treated in
this way. Let me go. This is outrageous. We'll all go back to the hotel
together. What's the point? These swindlers! It's my right! It's my right! They
want to deny me my rightful power! Why don't they get hold of Papa and we can
all have supper at my villa? I'm not wasting my time on that toffee nose again.
And I'm bloody sick of your terrible food, Ribbentrop. Maybe we can get you in
to see the president. That doddering old fool! Let's get you a taxi back to the
hotel. I shall walk! Thank you! I've never seen him like this. Yes, sometimes
it's an act. But this? We need to speak to Papen. Now he earns his keep. He has
Papen? Papen needs to utterly commit to the Führer as Chancellor. He needs to go
back to the president and tell him there is no alternative. But the president
still wants someone to form a parliamentary majority. Papen has a plan. I'll bag
the job of State Commissioner for Police in Prussia, Tom. See? That makes Fat
Herman my deputy. He thinks he can keep him in line. And that'll get Hugenberg
back to the table. But General Schleicher refuses to contemplate any strategy
but frontal attack. A tactic that has been repulsed several times already.
General, if not you, it will be Hitler. Trouble is, Tom, I just don't seem to
have the requisite propensity for megalomania. He plans no line of retreat. A
dissolution decree from the president is his only path to victory. He comes out
of his trenches on the morning of January 28th, Saturday. Your Excellency, I
have no desire to present the public with a needless display of certain defeat.
I cannot present myself to the Parliament on Monday without a dissolution decree
from you. Herr von Papen may be able to construct a majority with Herr Hugenberg
under the Constitution. That must be allowed. Between them, they command less
than 8% of the national vote. They are good chaps. They're sound. I cannot
proceed as Chancellor without a dissolution decree, sir. Herr General, I thank
you for your service to the country. Thank you, sir. I shall inform the Cabinet
of your decision. He walks through the corridors that connect the buildings.
After 57 days as Chancellor, he tells his Cabinet, It was... It was like talking
to a wall. They vote their last measure. Half a billion marks to create work
directly through government projects. Work for 2 million Germans across the next
6 months. Carried. Thank you, gentlemen. Sadly, it's the next Chancellor who
will reap this particular reward. Which opens the door to the man with 11
million votes. Herr Hitler has no way of opening this door. It's the others who
leave it open for him. We must allow Hitler and the Interior Ministries, both
Federal and Prussian. The man's a maniac! You want to give him control of all
police forces? I shall remain Commissar for Prussia. That's the trick, Alfred.
That places the Prussian Interior Minister under me. I can countermand him at
any time. Hitler must know that. Hermann's given me his word. Said his boss
finally accepted it, if not graciously. You're already conceding too much. Well,
he knows it. He knows it anyway. Hitler is the only way forward. God help us.
Better him than civil war. The Communists have stockpiles. They're ready. Do we
want to end up like Russia? The President is willing to consider a writer's
cabinet led by Hitler, with you and me there, to restrain him. And you will have
the real power, economy and agriculture. That's what the people care about.
Isn't it? It's yours, if you want it. After 20 years on the fringes of German
politics, never even close to power, of course he wants it. His agreement opens
that door a little wider. Hitler need do nothing. Has time for hospital visits.
No, no, no, he did, he did. Hermann wrote it all down, just like that. Your
Excellency, I would like to offer you the reassurances of the entire National
Socialist Movement. This from a fellow officer. Exactly! Military honour and all
that. Reassurance that we have no intention of violating the Constitution. And
that does the trick. President wrote straight back, delighted to have it in
writing. Is that what Lasker's doing? Meissner's in with us now too. Er,
Meissner? The President's Chief of Staff, darling. Oh, yes, I knew that. I'm so
tired. We're keeping you. I'm sorry. No, don't go. Please. Now, Magda, you must
rest. You've been ill. A little infection. Nothing. Little? She's been in
hospital for a fortnight. And the baby? Joseph found a wonderful nurse. Well,
too, their sisters. Little Helga couldn't be better cared for. We're going to
give all our children names beginning with H. Did she tell you? You really don't
need to. Tell me some more. Don't go. Who else is in the Cabinet? I don't care
who they want. What matters is that they each commit to fresh elections. Pack
the Cabinet with Papin's people. That's the best way to keep England quiet.
They're all aristos. It's practically a return to the Kaiser. Wouldn't you like
to be Kaiser? Oh, me? Hmm? It's an idea. Then can I be Crown Prince? Oh, Crown
Prince Joseph! Does that make me a princess? You already are, my dear. Queen of
all our hearts. You must get some rest now. No rest for Papin. He's assembling
the perfect picture for the President. Sunday afternoon, the 29th, he has all
the other rightists in his apartment, just next to the Chancellery. Gentlemen!
We have all the existing Cabinets staying in post. And he isn't demanding we
have new elections or anything like that? The country's had enough elections,
don't you think? We all have. You're sure that isn't his plan? Two Cabinet
posts. That's his demand. And in return he becomes Chancellor of Germany? With
only two Cabinet Ministers, he will be utterly boxed in by us. That's naive.
This man, he cannot be trusted. He's immoral. He's devious. He's the only man
who can lead a Cabinet. He won 11 million votes at the last election. Without
his voting block, any government will fall. Get the President to suspend
elections. Theodore, if I have control of agriculture and I have control of
economics, sound government is assured. If you get into bed with a Boer
constrictor, don't complain when you wake up with broken legs. In bed with a
Hitler. Not a pleasant image. He wants dictatorship! He commands a mass
movement. They're fanatics. They expect nothing less. You're wrong. We have
hired him. Alfred, come here. Come here. Look down here. The Ministry Gardens.
See that path under the May tree? Yeah? Yes. One night, pretty soon, when the
Storm Troopers come to arrest you, you'll be running along there in your
underpants. General Schleicher remains in the building opposite. Utterly
excluded. He has to know what's going on. Thought I'd send Werner von
Alvensleben. He knows Goering and people like that. Shoots with them. But not
exactly the sharpest knife in the box, is he? I just need someone to sound out
the state of negotiations. Keep his ears open. Hear what they're up to. But when
Alvensleben gets there, he won't listen. He starts spouting the latest rumours.
You chaps, I mean, aren't you concerned that the President might still favour a
battle cabinet? Papen and Hugenberg and no Nazis? Come off it, Werner. It would
fall within the day. Well, frankly, and I think you should know this, the
Defence Force is concerned. Go on. If the President is shamming, only pretending
to negotiate with you, then the Defence Minister, along with the Army Chief of
Staff, fully intend to mobilise and march on the Presidential Palace. So it's a
coup? Or is this another of your awful jokes? No, far be it from me. It's just
the talk. Get von Heldorf on the phone. I want the storm detachment on high
alert. I'll ring our chap and the police. Must be ready to occupy the
Chancellery with at least six battalions. It's all nonsense, of course, but
Goering telephones Meissner. Bloody hell, Herman, it's two in the morning. What?
Who telephones Papen. I'm so sorry, sir, but we're hearing that General
Schleicher has mobilised the Potsdam garrison. It's on the march. Here.
Disgraceful. He intends to seize the Presidency, impose military dictatorship.
Nobody bothers to check with Schleicher, who's tucked up in bed. The man's a
damned traitor. Their plan is to take you to your estate, detain you. They have
a sealed train ready. Nobody bothers to check with the railway station. We need
to swear in the new cabinet without delay, sir. I can hardly do that in the
middle of the night, can I? I think Herr von Papen means tomorrow morning,
Father. First thing, midday. Eleven. Indeed. Wish I'd never heard of that
blessed Article 48. Eleven o'clock then, sir. Swear them all in. They're sharp.
I don't want any sitting around. I'll meet General Blomberg, shall I, at the
station? Bring him straight here. And now the door opens wide for Herr Hitler.
Opened by fear of a non-existent military coup. Opened by a sudden, needless
urgency. It's Monday morning, the 30th of January. General Blomberg, welcome. We
have a car just through here. General. Thank you. General. General. This way,
please. I beg your pardon? I have orders to escort the general at once to the
Ministry of Defence. It's Schleicher's last move on the chessboard to keep his
job at the Defence Ministry. The President requires him immediately. Well, this
is an order signed by the Minister. Forgive me, General, this way, if you would
be so kind. You cannot countermine my father, the President. The military has
precedence over... General, this way. You can't... Please, sir. I'm sorry,
General. I need to... Major! I'm giving you an order. Sir? As your superior
officer, I'm ordering you to take your hands off this general. Sir. This way,
please. General. At 9am prompt, Werner Edward Fritz von Blomberg is sworn in as
Defence Minister in breach of the Constitution. This is a damned scandal,
Meisner. There was talk of a military coup d'etat. My authority as Defence
Minister has been utterly violated, and I intend to make an official... You are
no longer Defence Minister. I beg your pardon? His Excellency swore in General
Blomberg about 30 minutes ago. You can't swear in a minister unless he has been
nominated by the Chancellor, and right now I am still... Excuse me, General.
Sorry. It was clearly stated all ministers must agree to... Fresh elections!
Gentlemen, for the love of God, and the Corn... Franz, did you know about this?
I didn't realise it was quite so crucial. How could you not? I made it crystal
clear, non-negotiable. New elections, following which all are committed to
voting for an enabling act. What's wrong with the last elections? Did they so
inaccurately reflect the will of the people? Gentlemen, we are due upstairs with
His Excellency. Madness! As if we would have another election! You're worried
you'll lose the election, lose seats. Absolutely correct. I have no intention of
handing you the Chancellorship and then watching you campaign from that position
of power. Absolutely no intention, Hitler, whatsoever! Hugenberg, Hugenberg, I
give you my word, Herr Hugenberg. Following the election, regardless of result,
the members of the Cabinet will remain unchanged. I should accept the word of a
man who has lied and lied and lied again? I give you my word. As a German.
You're Austrian. Ahem. Friends, we are so close. Such a remarkable alliance we
have here today. Are we really, are we really going to throw it all away? It is
11.15. The President cannot be kept waiting! As you wish. Elections. Gentlemen,
congratulations. Thank you. Thank you. Shall we go up? This way. Thank you. Von
Papen reads through the names of the new Cabinet and next door, for General
Schleicher, it is checkmate. Gentlemen, I am delighted to see the Nationalist
Right has finally come together. This is a fine, fine moment. Shall we, sir? The
oath. Yes, yes. Herr Hitler, repeat after me. I will employ my strength I will
employ my strength for the welfare of the German people for the welfare of the
German people for the welfare of the German people protect the Constitution
protect the Constitution and may I... And laws of the German people And laws of
the German people conscientiously discharge the duties imposed on me
conscientiously discharge the duties imposed on me and conduct my affairs of
office impartially and with justice and with justice to everyone. And now,
gentlemen, And now, gentlemen, forwards with God! forwards with God! forwards
with God! forwards with God! forwards with God! forwards with God! forwards with
God! forwards with God! forwards with God! forwards with God! It's Wednesday,
the 1st of February, and Adolf Hitler has been Chancellor of Germany for two
days. His cabinet agrees to elections on the 5th of March. Elections he expects
to give him an irresistible mandate to abolish the Constitution. We have the
President's approval, gentlemen. Parliament will be dissolved and the
forthcoming election, as we have promised His Excellency, will be the last. And
in that cabinet, Hermann Goering is Prussian Minister of the Interior, which
puts 50,000 policemen at his disposal. They'll have to come out of their lair
sooner or later. Minister? The Communists. We just need to poke them. Don't we,
Inspector? We want them to... And then we tear them to pieces. Our intelligence,
sir, our informers tell us that Comrade Stalin believes capitalism is on the
verge of collapse. Anyway... On what evidence? The election, forgive me,
Minister, the election of the Chancellor. Well... That is funny, Diels. Very
funny. I want you to get ready. Get the entire Berlin force ready. I want the
blaggards out. We need to cleanse this whole place. I want you to do it, Diels.
Sir? We already have these names, these city police chiefs, all Democrats, all
got to go. 14, sir. I won't have Marxists in the Prussian police force. Give
them early retirement. We're cleaning house. We'll need replacements, sir. We
have plenty of party members looking for work. It's enthusiasm that counts. As
senior police officers. We need a memo out. Ready? All police departments are
required to combat the activities of hostile organisations with the most severe
means. And, where necessary, making unhesitating use of armed force. Firearms.
Police officers who use their weapons, write this down, use their firearms in
performance of their duties, are endorsed by me. Regardless of consequences.
Don't we need the lawyers to check that? Conversely, those who hesitate to do
their duty out of some misplaced consideration will suffer disciplinary action.
Got all that? That's granting the men licence to do whatever they... Inspector
Diels, there's no limit to how far you could go. Yet the streets remain quiet.
The outrages do not occur. The communists don't dare do anything. What's going
on, Rudy? There's nothing for you fellows to do. Why is no one... They're
getting me to write lists. Lists? Names. For when a certain circumstance arises.
Jews? Not just. Artists, writers, journalists, scientists, lawyers, doctors,
anyone who's ever said anything about the party. Is it true? The brownshirts
lift them off the street, take them off to cellars and warehouses? They call it
a rub down. Belts. Studded belts. Iron bars, whips. Anything, really. Anything.
It's... We found one place. All of them lying on straw. Rows of them. Blue,
green, yellow, bruises. Eyes, teeth. This life's on the out of erroneous bosh.
And still, no one complains. In the face of the increasing violence and unrest
on our streets, I have no option but to allow members of the Storm Detachment to
now enroll as auxiliary policemen. So much for Pappen's plan to overrule
Goering's use of the police force. Outrageous. Left radical. Outrageous. Are
overwhelming the existing forces. All officers must use all methods, regardless.
And still, no one complains. Any bullet fired from the barrel of a police pistol
is my bullet. If you call that murder, then I am the murderer. It's almost
impossible for the Social Democrats to campaign. It's unthinkable for the
Communist Party. It's almost impossible for the Social Democrats to campaign.
It's unthinkable for the Communist Party. It's almost impossible for the Social
Democrats to campaign. It's unthinkable for the Communist Party. I know two
kinds of law, because I know two kinds of men. It's simple. Those who are with
us and those who are against us. Hedelma, Hedelma, there's something funny about
the Reichstag. The Parliament building at this hour? Not a bloody taxi in sight.
Tip off ten minutes ago. One of my petrol station attendants. They all have my
card. Some sort of big full of balloon, firemen and police, and all manner of
people. Thank you. Hold up, hold up. I get my ten marks. Twenty, if it's good.
They hear it from Putsi. It's on fire! What is it, Putsi? The Reichstag. The
whole Parliament building, going up. It's all orange. Too many whiskey toddies,
maybe. Fire engines and everything. Magda, listen to me. Chief, your foreign
press spokesman said the Reichstag is on fire. It isn't a joke! It's... I'm in
Herman's flat! It's right opposite. He-hes, he-hes. Mr. Hedelma, your colleague
from the Times is already here. I saw him. Embarrassing. God, I hope this isn't
the work of our people. It's just the sort of damn silly thing they might do. Is
that... Here he comes! They're going in the West Portal. Will you mind if I come
along too? Evening, Mr. Hedelma. Chancellor. My Führer, this is the Communists,
without doubt. We already have one of the arsonists under arrest. Who is it? No
name yet. We'll squeeze it out of him here, Doctor. Other buildings? I've sent
notice to all of them special guards. We walk through puddles, charred objects,
terrible smelling smoke. This is the beginning of the Red Uprising. We've been
expecting it. It's 1919 all over again. The Reds in Munich. Is... Is that the
debating chamber? Well, can we take a look? Careful now. Ready? Oh! My God! Shut
it! Shut it! Shut it, please! Is it under control yet? We're getting on top of
it, sir. See? Chancellor, one of their petrol soaked rags. We're thinking they
spread them over the chairs and desks. There's a nasty whiff of kerosene in
there. See, Hedelma? God grant that this is the work of Communists. Sir? You are
witnessing the onset of a great new era of German history. This fire is just the
beginning. Of what? Ah, look. Here, Vice-Chancellor! I was having dinner with
the President at my club. This is the work of Communists. We must crush them
with an iron fist. Agreed? Uh... Yes. This is our cue to eradicate them. No
mercy! The goblins are safe, I see. What? Tapestries, antiques and the library
is untouched. We must get to the Chancellery. Decide on measures. I'll get back
to His Excellency. Sir, the suspect names van der Lubbe as Dutch. Foreign
agents! Comintern! No, he says he was working alone. Oh, how ridiculous! This
would have required several men, the equipment, the petrol. No, no, no, no, no,
no. There'll be no more mercy. He broke in. He was actually seen by a policeman,
window by the South Port. Everybody connected with the Communists is to be
arrested. There's no more taking it easy on the Social Democrats, either. Says
he bought three packets of firelighters. You know, the naphthalene sawdust
things. To be frank, he's not all there. I will not listen to this! This is an
outrageous conspiracy! An attack on the state! Treason! High treason! This has
been, this has been carefully planned, but they've miscalculated, haven't they?
Yes, yes, he says it's a protest. Shut up, Diels! They've been planning this for
months. They knew I would be appointed and their campaign was ready. Herman,
find the Communist members, arrest them, hang them, hang them, hang them, hang
them tonight! Get rope, hang them from anything! Social Democrats! Diels,
assemble all officers! Asiatic subhumans! Corrupting our country! I want a truck
sent to every single address! I want every single one locked up by door! Get it,
shut up! I'll sign it! The ropes are mine! They'll have to turn on the morning
if we don't smash them now! Smash them utterly! None of us have seen him like
this. It isn't a performance, it's fury and terror all at once. But when I look
at Goering and Goebbels... Quite a scoop you have tonight, Mr. Dalma. Quite.
They're grinning, ear to ear. They know this is exactly what they need. By
sunrise, nearly all the Communist Party members and senior officials are in
custody. The offices are shutted, their newspapers banned until further notice.
And they don't stop there. Stop! Please stop! We've got to find the stuff! What
stuff? What are you expecting? You should have gone when you still could! And
abandoned my workers? Right! Shut up! In the van! You can't arrest him! He's a
member of state parliament! He's protected by... Member of parliament? Did you
hear that? The commies are commie girly. They're all going. He was elected! By
the people! You lot! You're filth! We're clearing you out! Like this! Now move
it! Head elected member! And they're the chancellery. What is this shit? The
communique, sir. This is some dreary police report! Where's the blood and guts?
I put what we found in century material. It's in the paragraph at the bottom.
Ten kilos? Ten lousy kilos! One out of a hundred! One out of a thousand! It's
just not physically possible. You couldn't carry... Anything is possible, Dios!
One man... The officer is certain. He was alerted by a member of the public, saw
the break-in at about ten past nine. Lubber had started a small fire... Twenty
men! Fifty! This is the start of the communist uprising! This is their beacon!
We've made no arrests. We will! We are! Van der Lubbe has confessed. He was on
his way to Constantinople. Oh, do shut up! And get it right this time! The
moment has arrived, gentlemen. The psychologically correct moment for
confrontation is here. Minister. Order for protection of the people and the
state. The following is ordered in defence against communist state-endangering
acts of violence. Articles 114, 115, 117, 118, 123, 124... Yes, yes, get to it.
And 153 of the Constitution are suspended until further notice. For God's sake,
Wilhelm! The meat! It is therefore permissible to restrict the rights of
personal freedom. Freedom of expression, including the freedom of the press, the
freedom to assemble, the privacy of postal, telegraphic and telephonic
communications. Warrants for house searches, orders for confiscations as well,
are also permissible beyond the legal limits. Hear, hear! Forgive me, just
reading ahead. It's no different to your decree last year regarding Prussia.
Forgive me? The powers are here, reserved to the state. In previous emergency
measures, they were lost in the hands of the army. There's no time for that.
Arrests have already been made. They need... The people know that the Defence
Force can be trusted as the arbitrator. A military state of emergency would
render elections impossible. Voting is in five days. It must proceed. But this
also, here, Article 2, gives you the authority to assume powers in all states.
Temporary powers to restore public security and order. Giving us power over all
police forces. We must vote. Anyone against? Good. Thank you. We'll take this to
the President immediately. When I speak to them afterwards... Minister... You
mentioned you have overwhelming evidence. And when I finally get the chance...
Sir? Could we possibly... No, Delma, I will not be constrained by legalisms. In
the meantime, I will not be constrained by legalisms. In this matter, with
communist terror groups in readiness all over Berlin, armed with explosives,
poisons, and God knows what, I am not required to establish your marvellous
justice. Right now, my task is to eradicate and eliminate and nothing else.
Vice-Chancellor von Papen. Tom, Tom! It's really nothing so terribly... These
Nazis... Once we've scraped the velvet from their horns, everything will be
tickety-boo. Again. And police inspector Deals... The man's confessed, Tom. He
was working alone. What am I supposed to do about that? He insists. Thing is,
the first fire, it just... It just go off. Only two packets left, lighters. I
burn it to my shirt, now on fire. I carry it like this. I'm going through maybe
five, six rooms now. I get to the church. The debating chamber. Yeah, the big,
big curtains behind the high altar. I put my shirt on the curtains. Sudden,
whoosh! Why did you do... Nazis must rebel against the state. They must begin
their own... You did all this alone. No, I do nothing for other people. All for
myself. They're saying it would have taken more than a single pair of hands. If
it was, it was Nazi hands. There's a tunnel, did you know? Connects the
Reichstag to the Chancellery. Under the road and then you're out. No one's seen
a thing. And when I finally get the chance... Chancellor, people are
suggesting... People, Delmer? People? Well, uh... Hegering has promised
evidence... Imagine if the Communists had tried to burn down your
Buckinghamshire palace. What would your government do? People are seeing these
arrests across Germany. Over 20,000 individuals were told... Mr. Delmer, Mr.
Delmer. Mr. Delmer. 14 years ago, I lay in a hospital bed in Silesia, blinded
after a gas attack. I had a vision. A message. Something telling me, telling me,
inspiring me to liberate the German people. To make Germany great again. Now we
can. And the next day, the night before the election, the Führer drives up to
Koenigsberg to meet with the German people. And the next day, the night before
the election, drives up to Koenigsberg Cathedral for his final speech to be
broadcast throughout the nation. Tonight, the gospel of a reawakened Germany
will be proclaimed. And tonight, the entire German people will witness something
unique. It's on loudspeakers in city squares all over Germany. Decorate your
homes with flags. Shout, wake up! Wake up at those who are still undecided. Over
14 years have passed since that unhappy day when the German people lost
everything. Since those days of treason, the Almighty has withdrawn his blessing
from our nation. Discord and hatred have taken its place. Today, my only fear is
that at this critical moment, somehow infected by the cowardice of the bourgeois
world, we proceed with velvet gloves instead of the iron fist. Gentlemen, the
two-thirds majority required to pass the enabling act will be easily achieved as
the 80 communist members will not be in attendance. They remain in protective
custody. The communist method of madness is trying at a last resort to poison
and undermine an inwardly shaken and uprooted nation. One more year of
Bolshevism would destroy Germany. The first special camp will be housed in a
former powder mill. Its capacity will be approximately 5,000. At the moment, it
houses 200 or so communist and social democrat functionaries. It is situated
just outside the village of Dachau. In the end, we do not live for ourselves.
Rather, we are responsible for everything which we shall one day leave for those
who come after us. We are not fighting for ourselves. Only for Germany. The
enabling act, the law to remedy the distress of the people and nation, 444
votes, 494 against. Absent members are presumed to have voted for. The act is
passed. So join me now. Join the president and me, the field marshal and the
ordinary front line soldier as we link hands to make Germany great again. Amen.
People of Germany, the church bells are ringing across the open fields, over the
silent forests and the mysterious lakes. Tonight, all of Germany glows in the
light of the fire of freedom. The day of national awakening has arrived. People,
arise now and follow our saviour as the storm breaks forth. Hitler! Hitler!
Hitler! Hitler! Hitler! Hitler! Hitler! That was part 8 of Nazis, the road to
power, written and directed by Jonathan Myerson with Derek Jacoby as President
Hindenburg, Adetomi Wahedun as Sefton Delmer and Tom Mothersdale as Adolf
Hitler. All other roles were played by Joseph Alessi, Oscar Batterham, Edward
Bennett, William Chubb, Melody Grove, Corey Johnson, Scott Kareem, George Kemp,
Saoirse Kennedy, Jack Lasky, Michael Maloney, Forbes Masson, Lynn Miller,
Alexander Vlahos and Andrew Woodall. Sound design by Adam Woodhams and Mark
Smith. Original score by Metaphor Music. The producer was Nicholas Newton. It
was a Promenade production for BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. And that concludes
our series Nazis,