TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-20-21H31M.MP3
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The humorist laughs at life and himself. I've been studying Japanese and I'll say something to Hugh. I'll say, oh did
you know that this is how you say and he says we're only going for four days. LAUGHTER A new series of Meet David
Sediris starts this Thursday evening at 6.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now Radio 4 in this week's analysis, the
journalists Nick Sturdie and Tim Hewell examine why so many Russians support their country's war against Ukraine. It was
a cold, grey morning almost exactly a year ago. I was filming at Hastomal airfield just outside the Ukrainian capital
Kiev when we ran into three soldiers. HE SPEAKS RUSSIAN A Ukrainian patrol, I assumed, until I saw their uniforms. Those
are Russians. Here comes a helicopter, here comes a helicopter. OK, let's go. Get in the car! It was a Ukrainian
counter-attack and the beginning of a full-scale war between two countries that had been so entwined that just a few
years earlier a popular Ukrainian comic called Volodymyr Zelensky had co-hosted Russian television's New Year's Eve
show. Today, one of those who swayed along in the audience, the Kremlin's top propagandist Vladimir Salvyov calls for
cities in the country that President Zelensky now leads to be wiped off the face of the earth. And yet, many Russians
believe, as one of the country's biggest stars sings, that right is on their side, that they're the ones under attack,
fighting for survival. I'm Nick Sturdi. And I'm Tim Hewell. We've been covering Russia for most of our lives and in this
programme we're trying to understand how millions of educated 21st century citizens have been persuaded to support, or
at least accept, a war with their closest neighbours and inhabit what seems a parallel universe. Maybe it's too easy to
say they've simply been brainwashed, zombified by Kremlin lies. You cannot be turned into zombie if you don't want to be
zombie. People are choosing to believe in this truth. We're going to find out how Russia's parallel world has been built
over many years by playing on a nation's memories and fears. In the spring of 2014, the year ushered in by Zelensky on
Russian TV, crowds chanting Russia, Russia seized government buildings across eastern Ukraine, including in Donetsk,
where I was filming. It's a mainly Russian-speaking city and perhaps more than anywhere else, the place around which the
Kremlin's alternative truth has been built. Armed separatists declared a breakaway People's Republic in reaction to the
overthrow, shortly before, of Ukraine's president, Viktor Yanukovych. He fled after massive protests against his refusal
to sign a deal with the European Union. But many Ukrainians in Donetsk and other eastern cities, who'd voted for
Yanukovych in democratic elections four years earlier, saw it as a Western-backed coup orchestrated by Ukrainian
nationalists. So too did volunteer fighters who came from Russia itself to defend Donetsk, including one called Pavyl
Kokhmerov, who cooked us a military supper of beef and macaroni in his barracks. Why do I say Donetsk is Jerusalem?
Because this is a holy war of the Russian people for its future, its ideals and its great country that was cut into
pieces 25 years ago. Who he wore, he meant that Donetsk had been retaken for Russia just as the Crusaders retook
Jerusalem. Then such lofty language seemed outlandish. Now it's commonplace in Russia, thanks partly to the information
war waged by nationalists like Pavyl, who's still in Donetsk blogging prolifically on social media. He's a rather
intellectual crusader whose non de guerre is Shakespeare because he loves the playwright so much. But he had to take up
a gun, he told us then, to help save Donetsk from a Ukrainian Nazi bloodbath. Now, when we speak to him again on the
phone, he claims it's only last year's Russian invasion that finally averted that threat. If it hadn't struck first,
there would have been genocide, just like Rwanda, pure and simple. But where's the evidence for this? For years before
2014, they had already been promising to slaughter Moskavites. A video clip, much shared by bloggers like Pavyl, shows
young protesters in western Ukraine in 2014 briefly chanting, Moskalayakunahilyakun, hang the Moskavite, an old
contemptuous term for Russians. It's just one of the tiny grains of fact used to build myths and spread fear. And the
shells that Ukraine has intermittently fired at Donetsk since 2014, trying to regain its own territory, are also
supposedly evidence of its murderous intent. Pavyl says he's lost comrades. Half the lads you saw then are gone. After
30 were killed, I stopped counting. And as we speak, he says, there's another attack. It sounds like NATO shells. There
is snow outside and very few people, because it is an act of courage just to go out for food or medicine. Donetsk now is
a hell. Ever since 2014, the Kremlin-controlled media has kept the suffering of Donetsk near the top of the news. And
that's convinced many Russians that they'd already been at war for eight years when Putin's so-called special military
operation began last February. Even now, relatively minor Ukrainian attacks on Donetsk are reported in detail, with no
mention of far worse Russian attacks elsewhere in Ukraine. But the hyperbole, spread by bloggers like Pavyl and repeated
on talk shows, doesn't stop there. If Donetsk falls, they argue, all of Russia may eventually be lost. On many Western
platforms, they say openly that Russia should be carved up into 26 separate states. Who says that? Look, Ukraine's head
of military intelligence, Mr Kirill Budanov, has a map in his office of Russia divided up. Another grain of truth,
weirdly. Perhaps it's a bad joke. Budanov does have a map a bit like that. You can imagine how Russia's influential talk
shows lap that up. On one 60 Minutes host Evgeny Popov told viewers the map showed how Kiev dreams of decolonising
Russia. And yet, when we talked to Popov, he insisted, following the Kremlin line, that this isn't a war against
Ukrainians, it's just against their Western masters. My own father right now lives in Ukraine. It's a terrible situation
for all Slavic people, for all Russian people, for all Ukrainian people. But you should blame yourself, because you, the
Western Wall, are moving your military infrastructure to our border, closer and closer. We are at war with NATO and Nazi
regime of Zelensky. Sorry, just come back to this one point about your father. I'm not going to tell you more about it.
Oh, please just tell me a bit about his circumstances. No, no, nothing. Is he suffering just the same things as you?
Stop, I'm not going to tell you more. For security reasons, he says. Or is it just too uncomfortable to put himself in
his father's shoes right now? Popov's an experienced correspondent, and yet there's something about his approach to his
work that takes me aback. You were chief correspondent of Russian TV in New York for six years. Yes. I'm interested, did
that change the way you thought about the West? I knew everything about the United States before I came to New York.
Really? And I did not change my mind on anything, because I knew everything. We have free press in our country. Who are
you to dictate us how to live? That's the main question I can ask the Western war. But if Russia invades a sovereign
neighbouring country, how is that not ultimate dictation of its will? Ask yourself. If Great Britain invades a sovereign
country as Iraq, tell me, how do you feel when you occupy Malveen Islands? You're talking about the Falklands? Of
course, it's Malveen Islands, and they are Argentinian islands, not yours. You're asking me about invasion. What's the
hypocrisy, man? As he's talking, I feel myself transported back to 1982, the year the Falklands, or Malvenas, were
retaken by Britain after an Argentine invasion, and I was a student in Leonid Brezhnev's Soviet Union. And what was
surprising in that then-isolated country was that many people I met believed, or claimed to believe, that they knew more
about the West than I did. Just as Evgeny Papov now says, he didn't need to go to America to learn about it. He was only
13 when the Soviet Union broke up, but the yabu, anti-Western tone of TV shows like his feels like a time warp. Has
anything changed, in your opinion, in the relations between Russia and the West since Soviet times? I was born in Soviet
Union. I like this country, of course, and nobody asked me when you destroyed my country. And we made a great mistake
when we hugged each other in the 90s. Oh, really? When the Western Russia embraced, when it hugged, that was a mistake?
You destroyed my country. How do you think I can feel about you? But today, in Russia, it's not just servants of the
Kremlin's media who inculcate scorn for the West. There are other voices who've started scoffing in similar fashion on
their own initiative, who appeal to a younger, cooler audience. Can I introduce myself? My name is Ivan Kandakov. I was
born in Arkhangelsk, it's the northern part of Russia. Now I'm an engineer, I'm a scientist in aviation structures and
also I'm a poet, I'm a singer, and I'm a comedy maker, to say the fact. In this slick video, Ivan, a jovial character
with a full-blown beard, is strumming his guitar and clinking champagne glasses with friends in his kitchen as they tuck
into plates of brawn. Brawn? Well, it's an old-fashioned Russian dish that has to be boiled for hours. And that's the
joke in Ivan's song. Russia's not short of cheap energy, so we can enjoy our lovely pig's trotters in jelly, thank you
very much, while you Western Russophobes who won't buy our gas just shiver through the winter. Ivan's nationalism, like
Evgeny Popov's, dates back to the 1990s, when I lived in Russia and I remember it well. He was a teenager back then. As
you know, we have lost the Cold War, so in Russia, especially in the province, it was a complete fallout. Industries
have been closed, people lose their jobs. Yes, it was a feeling of shame, a feeling of absence of the future. But at the
same time, the 90s was a point when there was a democracy, was there not? Democracy is the same fairy tale as communism.
They say you have some choice, in fact you have no choice. Your salary can be measured. Democracy and elections cannot
be measured. That means this is nothing. Territory, however, can be measured. And in 2014, Russia got more, when
Vladimir Putin announced to a jubilant Moscow crowd what he called the return of Crimea to Russia. It was that seizure
of Ukrainian land that turned Ivan, from a fairly apolitical aviation engineer, into a flag-waving patriot. And
eventually into a Z-singer and Z-poet, part of what's now a whole cultural movement, named after the letter that denotes
support for the war. He's got thousands of followers on his YouTube and Telegram channels and his own radio show,
bringing him a measure of fame he quite enjoys. My life changed. I can see when some people on the streets recognise me
and say, hey, it's you, it's you. I'm looking at this influence and I think I'm doing right, because I know the Russian
mentality, I know what people are worrying about and I try my best to make them a little smile. He mocks liberals and
anti-war campaigners, who are traitors in his book, but perhaps the biggest target of his humour, as he sees it, is a
group that the Kremlin also attacks ever more in its information war. LGBT people. He has a favourite poem. Can I read
it? The wrong translation is that in English there is a lot of words meaning genders. Everyone needs their own toilets.
Yuri, Harry Potter, non-binary helicopter. So plenty of them. We challenged him about his homophobia, but his answers
became ever more offensive. Do you like being intolerant? I don't understand how people can like to be tolerant. Russia
is for traditional values. Frankly speaking, the Western world now is for... We call it Satanism. You call it what?
Satanism. That's quite an apocalyptically black and white view of the conflict, and one that Sasha Archipova, a social
anthropologist researching Russian attitudes to the war, has often encountered. Many, many people to whom I was
speaking, they are believers of the idea that we are living in this bipolar world and everybody is in the war against
us. So we are not aggressors. We are defenders, and we are defending our spiritual core. And the last time the Russians
defended their country, their values, and won was in the Second World War. The Great Patriotic War, as it's known in
Russia, commemorated every year on May 9th, Victory Day. As the number of surviving veterans has dwindled, people
carrying portraits of fathers and grandfathers who fought have joined the parades, part of what was originally a
grassroots initiative called Immortal Regiment. The original idea was not to commemorate victory, but to commemorate
loss, and the main slogan was Never Again. But especially after the annexation of Crimea, a lot of new people started to
participate, and the main idea for them became not Never Again, but we can repeat why. Because they start to feel that
the revolution in Ukraine is something very bad, and the West is trying to steal Ukraine and steal our victory, and this
idea of going to war, of heroic behaviour, became more and more popular every year. Modern Russia is a big country with
different languages, and there is a lot of people who don't like the Soviet past. So the victory in the Second World War
is the only thing which can unite people, and the presidential administration, they make this idea of war against the
evil, against the Nazi, the new common ground to the new Russian identity. We are the sons and daughters and grandsons
of people who fight the evil. And now this evil is in the territory of Ukraine. Last year on Victory Day, Vladimir
Putin, carrying a portrait of his father, led a million people through Red Square. He wore the orange and black ribbon
of St George, originally a czarist military decoration that was used again in the Second World War. Since 2014, it's
been promoted and worn as a symbol of the so-called Russian Spring, the annexation of Crimea. and aggression in eastern
Ukraine, and now a support for today's war. That's why I'm talking about this cult of dead, like about the new civil
religion. It became a symbol on the battlefields too. Those young Russian parents who were in the war, those young
Russian paratroopers I saw who landed at Hastomel airfield a year ago, all wore thick orange and black stripes sewn
along the lengths of their sleeves, hardly effective camouflage. Days later, pictures emerged of scores of dead Russian
soldiers in the outskirts of Kiev, all wearing the same stripes, dead testimonies to a cult of reliving heroic history.
Not long after me, Russia's most celebrated war correspondent, Alexander Kotz, also reported from Hastomel airfield. He
called it a new site of Russian military glory. Its occupiers, though of course he didn't use that word, were worthy
successors to Russian warriors who'd fought the Turks in the 19th century and the Germans in the 20th. By chance, I'm an
old acquaintance of Kotz. We've been in contact since we met in 2008, after he reported on the poor state of
preparedness of the Russian military in a war where he was wounded when Russia invaded its neighbour, Georgia. Kotz
reports for the popular daily Komsomolska Pravda, which Putin himself says he reads every morning on his way to work.
Kotz's Telegram channel and those of other war bloggers are followed by millions. And in a very rare interview with the
Western media, he told us he sees himself and his colleagues as more than mere reporters. They're also the link between
rank-and-file soldiers and the country's leaders. Sometimes messages get passed up through us and we become leaders of
public opinion for certain social groups. People may not trust official statements on TV, but they'll certainly read war
correspondence on Telegram. Kotz says openly that his aim is to raise Russian morale. And he says he's learnt a lesson
about that from the enemy. Driving through Russia early in the war, he saw no patriotic posters, whereas in Ukraine...
When we entered towns we liberated that had been under Ukrainian control, we found every park had a monument to a
defence of the fatherland. Every school had a portrait of a soldier. They had been building up their ideology, and I
have to say, they'd done it rather well. So Kotz set out to create Russian heroes. He wrote, for example, about a young
airman called Pyotr Kashtanov, shot down along with his navigator by Ukrainian anti-aircraft guns over enemy territory.
They started to walk towards our lines 30 kilometres away, but the navigator had a broken spine and he said, just leave
me behind, but Kashtanov replied, we'll get out of this together. I won't leave you. To Russians, his experience
recalled the story turned into an iconic film of a Second World War pilot, Alexey Mariesyev, who was badly injured in
both legs when he was shot down by the Germans and crawled through snowbound forests back to Russian territory. I was
very touched when one man told me he'd read my story to his child at bedtime and he said stories like that should be
taught in schools in patriotism hour. And yet, despite all the propaganda for the war, anthropologist Sasha Archipova's
research suggests most Russians just accept it, rather than actually supporting it. The Russian government punished you
for any type of street rallies, protests. So people feel more and more you cannot do anything. That's what psychologists
called enforced helplessness. One of my informants, she gave me this image that I'm like a leaf in the stream. I'm just
going somewhere and I cannot influence anything that is happening around me. It's a very popular position now. OK, it's
terrible what is going on. And I don't like this war and people are dying, but what can I do? Archipova says that
enforced helplessness may even lead to enforced patriotism, a feeling of my country, right or wrong, because if there's
nothing they can do, opponents of the war who stay in Russia may accept elements of the Kremlin's truth just to stay
sane. People try to avoid any information which is unpleasant for them. There is no alternative sources of information
inside Russia for many, many, many Russian people. But even if you have a possibility to read a telegram channel, maybe
you don't want to do it because you are very tired of this situation. So it's not a brainwashing because people are
choosing to believe in this truth. But for how much longer? BBC Russian service researchers have corroborated the deaths
of more than 14,600 Russian military personnel in Ukraine over the last year. But the real figure is thought to be at
least twice as high, probably more. So will the ever-rising death toll change what Russians choose to believe once it
inevitably becomes public knowledge, as happened in the wars in Afghanistan and Chechnya? Or will it just reinforce the
Kremlin's truth, because no-one wants to believe that a son, husband or friend died in vain? The nine years that Pavel,
fighter, blogger and Shakespeare lover, has spent on the front line seems only to have strengthened his patriotism. What
makes Shakespeare a great writer is that he is able to look at reality through another person's eyes. What do you think
the war looks like for ordinary Ukrainians? Look, how can I put myself in the position of people who are trying to kill
me every day? Who used to love visiting London? Now, the ugly language of songs like this is gradually filling more and
more public space in Russia, part of a tide of aggression and hatred that citizens can't insulate themselves from. But
what will Ivan and other turbo-patriots do if the war eventually ends badly for Russia? Even Putin's go-to reporter,
Alexander Kotz, is worried about that. Defeat will really shake the trust of those most loyal to the state and lead to a
revolutionary move. I don't even want to think about it, because it won't be like the uprising in Ukraine in 2014. It
will be far bloodier. A coup or uprising by the nationalist right is no longer inconceivable. As Ivan Kondakov sings,
this is the time of Z. And whatever happens in this war, the stories that have built Russia's parallel world may have
changed the country forever. Analysis was produced and presented by Tim Hewell and Nick Sturdey. I could not imagine
that I would stay here. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party services and
platforms. And the BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet
radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile,
this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. Now I'm ready. Ukrainians in Britain. Where next? Tomorrow morning at
11.