TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 11 o'clock. Rishi Sunak has met MPs on the Conservative 1922
Committee as he works to rally support for his Brexit deal with the European
Union. He told them to give the Democratic Unionist Party time and space to
consider the new arrangements called the Windsor Framework as they wait to see
if the party will back the deal. Our political editor Chris Mason gave his
assessment of the mood in Westminster. It's going down pretty well among many
Conservative MPs, including among some sceptics who are not used to saying
positive stuff about the government and Brexit and are finding themselves doing
that. That said, a group of the more sceptical Conservative MPs gathered
tonight, they reckon it could take about a fortnight for them to come to a
considered view. Police have said that more than 200 officers are searching a
large area in the hopes of finding a missing baby whose parents have been
arrested on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. Constance Martin and her
partner Mark Gordon have been avoiding the police for weeks by moving around the
country. The couple were arrested yesterday on suspicion of child neglect but
the baby was not with them. The number of people sleeping rough in England has
risen for the first time since 2017. And statistics show there were more than
3,000 people found sleeping outside on a single night last autumn. That's 26 per
cent higher than in 2021. Sainsbury's is planning to close two Argos depots over
the next three years as part of an overhaul which will affect around 1,400 jobs.
The retailer's chief executive Simon Roberts says the businesses need to become
more efficient for customers. In football, Blackburn have reached the quarter-
finals of the FA Cup after winning at Leicester 2-1. Brighton beat Stoke 1-0 to
reach this stage of the competition for only the fifth time in their history.
And Manchester City and Fulham are also through. BBC News. On BBC Radio 4. We
are all a unique accumulation of our own unique experiences and knowledge. The
poet Lem Sissay looks at uniqueness. Rainfall, like applause, is utterly unique
every time it happens. Reflecting on the occasions he's stood out. In a room
full of graduates, people without degrees can sometimes get defensive about it.
Not me! Lem Sissay is the one and only. He'll like an aw. Starting this Friday
morning at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Well now on Radio 4 for another
episode of Alex Settleman's Peer Group. And this week, the American stand-up and
his peers take a look at millennials' preoccupation with social media. Hi, my
name is Alex Settleman and this is the second series of a show called Peer
Group. It's about millennials. This episode is all about millennials'
relationship with social media and the internet. The internet. The quickest way
to lose your job, get a burrito and access pornography. Or if you're my cousin
Rafi, all three at once. By the way, the show is called Peer Group for two
reasons. One, because to make the show, I spoke to a bunch of peers to see how
they feel about stuff. And two, when the show becomes big, I'm going to spin it
off into a chain of high street glasses stores. To service the first reason,
you'll actually be hearing from some of those friends. To service the second
reason, follow me on Twitter for 20% off bifocals and very focal lenses. I'm
Alex Settleman. Welcome to Peer Group. There are many functional definitions of
internet, but I like my friend Brandon's one. The internet is like a gun and we
all have access to this gun, but like we shouldn't. Like I like just I've like
learned how powerful the internet is and I try to be responsible about it
because with great power comes great responsibility. And that's a quote that I
created. I checked the sourcing on that quote just so you know, and Brandon's
right. He actually did come up with that. That's his. I love that as an example.
What a specific kind of gun, right? Like one that only works on yourself. So
it's like a weird kind of gun because you either provide the gun or you provide
the ammunition and that's like scary and awe inspiring and weird. Or in the case
of Justine Sacco, all three, you won't remember Justine Sacco, but as my friend
David tells you this story, you're going to be like, oh yeah, her. Interesting
example of Justine Sacco, who was the PR executive who famously tweeted, I'm
going to South Africa. Hope I don't get AIDS. Not a great joke. Not a great
joke. And the famous story of how she ended up fired by the time she landed from
her flight to New York to South Africa and a crowd of people had gathered to
greet her at the airport. You guys remember that? Yeah. The hashtag was, has
Justine landed yet? And that was the end of her life effectively. Right David?
It's interesting. She just was hired this year to be the head of PR for the
Match Group, which runs match.com, Tinder and all these other things. I love
that she got a job working as the head of PR for match.com because that must
have been an interview that went like perfectly for her. Just like, Hey, we're a
web-based company. Do you have any experience with the internet? I have like the
most experience with the internet. It's been a tiny bit of a mixed blessing if
I'm being honest with you. And I could just like sit here and list times that
someone has been brought down via the internet, but it would be boring and grim
and it would be like outdated before this thing was broadcast. I'm actually
predicting next that someone tweets behind the scenes footage from planet earth
and David Attenborough is just like viciously kicking penguins into the sea. And
the internet can end you. And it is like a gun. And like at any time you can
ruin everything by tweeting something. I feel that sometimes. Like I just feel
the incredible power of being like one of these days, I'm going to pull out my
phone and tweet how I really feel about Gardner's question time. It is a gun.
Like, have you ever had your boss standing in front of you and he's talking and
you sort of go into your own head and you just think to yourself, what if I just
punched him in the face right now? Just like the power to radically alter your
own path, like even in a negative way is so tempting and I used to work in
advertising and subway was a client and I used to think, what if I just tweet
subway is called that because every store smells like one. It's the exact same
thing. And I think people refuse to stop sharing things when truly the best idea
would be to never share. And it's created a lot of noise. My friend Jack sums it
up pretty succinctly. He's got a really thoughtful solution. Yo, we got to get
rid of the internet dog. Like everybody can't just talk. That's ridiculous.
That's, that's silly. That's a dumb idea. He's right. We got to get rid of the
internet dog. There's heavy stuff out there. People are posting incessantly and
like there's a misconception that we spend all of our time posting but in all
stuff like eating a sandwich. But the problem is people don't actually do that.
They overshare. Even a post about food can be an ordeal. Now I don't mind when
people post like making a sandwich. It's when my friend Devin posts like making
a sandwich. But I fear that no amount of sandwiches can fill the bottomless void
that was left in me when my wife took our children and our cat making a sandwich
just reminded me of the relationship that I used to have with my own father who
would make me say, wait, I'm like, what kind of sandwich is this? And I only
tweet for the same reason that I do anything because I think Jesus would be
doing it if he was still around. Although just 12 followers, loser. This is
Apostle Mark. This is Apostle John. Judas would be like, this is Apostle Russian
troll. Frankly, I think this is one of the biggest problems millennials have to
deal with is the amount of noise, the amount of information, the amount of data,
the amount of news, the amount of stuff, right? It's coming across the transom
on a regular basis. It's totally overwhelming. Yeah, that's David. He's right.
And we move quickly from like knowing nothing about anyone to knowing something
about a few people to knowing like we know everything about everybody. I have
friends who have opened up to me more in one session than my parents have opened
up to me in their entire lives. If you ask me to describe my father to you,
you'd think he was an elusive criminal on the run. And I was the newest FBI
agent. I'd be like, what do we know about the suspect? He was born in Boston and
I think he's somewhere in his fifties. And the only photo we have of him is from
a family vacation he took to Panama 10 years ago. We've heard his name is
Elazar, but the nickname he goes by is dad. I know very little about my dad, but
this is what I know about Bennett, who I've met exactly twice. He suffers from
clinical depression. He wonders if he was born in the right body. And he has
told me and everyone else in his Facebook feed that his baseline emotional level
is quite painful. I met this guy twice and like, I don't think people realize
that they're putting this out there. I think they just see the computer in front
of them. I was talking to my friend and I was like, how's your divorce going?
And she was like, how do you know about my divorce? And I was like, your
podcast, your guests were your lawyer and the removal van driver. And the whole
thing was sponsored by welcome break. And sometimes I worry that I'm not in
touch with my feelings because of social media, but like, have you ever made
yourself cry on purpose? I used to do that. I used to use the internet to cry on
purpose. I was like, I have this theory that any day that fluid is coming out of
you and it's not blood, that's a good day. And I used to cry at this video of
this soldier coming home from the war in Afghanistan and surprising his son at
his son's first baseball game. And by the way, that is the most American clip
possible. It's baseball, dad's war. That's the whole thing. And the son's on the
field and he turns around and his dad is standing there and the dad's been away
for a year and they hug and the dad whispers in his ear, I'm just like, it's the
end of gladiator all over again for me, which is the manliest cry in the world.
But I'm numb to everything now. Like it's very hard for me to crysturbate. It's
less wholesome too, by the way, that video, because like there are loads of
comments underneath it and it's totally changed the context of this. Like one
guy's like, what a beautiful relationship. But someone else is like baseball
sucks. And then someone will be like, ah, the war in Iraq was illegal. This man
is a terrorist. And one person's like, this reminds me of a sandwich my father
used to make me. And I'm like, Devin? Here's Brandon again. Twitter's literally
like too powerful and too dumb. And like, also I do think that like the
president's made people dumber. Guys you're not gonna believe this, but the
president, the president's like our prime minister, but like people really want
this job. The president, we did this very cool and smart thing where instead of
getting like a lifelong public servant and like qualified politician, you're not
going to believe this is crazy. We got the host of The Apprentice. His name is
Donald Trump. He's made social media, which was like ostensibly a public forum
into legitimately professional wrestling. You know what I love the internet for
now? I'm embarrassed to admit this, but you know what I love it for? Fighting.
Oh, it's great for fighting. You pick fights with whoever you want. This week I
did a tiny bit of it. This is like an experiment for this. Okay. So on Tuesday I
did a tweet about the actor and privately educated playboy, Tom Hiddleston. Back
in 2015, Tom Hiddleston was on Graham Norton show with Robert De Niro, where he
gleefully maneuvers his way into what would be my worst nightmare, which is an
impression of Robert De Niro in front of Robert De Niro. And it's universally
acknowledged as like absolutely terrible. But fortunately for Tom Hiddleston,
Robert De Niro's smile looks exactly the same as Robert De Niro's grimace. And
Robert De Niro's laughing face is the same as Robert De Niro's, oh my God, this
impression sucks face. And the clip is so worth seeing because like you get to
see Anne Hathaway, who's the third guest, cringe so hard, her spine almost comes
out of her nose. And I did a dumb tweet about it. And this is the tweet. Live
every day with the confidence of Tom Hiddleston doing his absolutely garbage
impression of Robert De Niro in front of Robert De Niro. But I should have known
better because like Kim Jong-un, Tom Hiddleston has a notoriously reactive fan
base. And like Kim Jong-un, he cannot do a serviceable impression of Robert De
Niro. The tweet is not offensive, but it does like seek to cause offense. It's
not like an edgy tweet because there are not going to be any repercussions to
that unless I'm applying in a few years for like a position as Tom Hiddleston's
personal assistant slash impressions coach. And if that's happening, I have way
bigger problems because it's like fun. It's harmless. There's no victim here.
He's a nice guy. I mean, he seems like a nice guy, but like I think he really is
a nice guy because I know celebrities sometimes like do impressions of nice
people. But I know that's not the case with Tom Hiddleston because he cannot do
any impressions. And his fans were so furious. They all jumped in and it was a
lot of fun. And here's the key. I just left it. I didn't respond to any of the
Hiddlestoners because I think people should remember what the internet is for,
what social networks are for. Dumb places for dumb things. There are four
descriptions of your sandwich. They're not your therapist. Here's David again. I
think it's really difficult because the way we've interpreted the medium is to
use the medium as something that is like private conversations, even though it
is a public platform and everyone of course knows that it's meant to be a casual
platform. When Twitter came out, the Library of Congress said, we are going to
keep every tweet to preserve what they said was the greatest possible global
conversation, which was like, that was a big announcement when it came out. And
then in 2017, very quietly, they were like, we're not doing that anymore. We're
not saving any more of the tweets. We don't need this. And I just imagine being
the guy that pitched that idea 10 years ago, he's going to be like, it's not
that much work. It's like 25 clever guys talking about computer programming. And
they're like, Ted, it's going to be a lot of work. He's like, Terry, it's not
going to devolve into a destabilizing hellscape. Come on. I'm not saying it's
going to be a lot of work, guys. I might have to stay like 45 minutes extra most
nights to just log all the tweets and stuff like that. And then cut to like
2011, his hair is completely white. He's leaving the office every day at 5am,
walks out of the building to his car, and he opens up Twitter. He's like, just
finished work finally. Oh, God damn it. Oh, two retweets, killing it. All right.
So anyway, let's get down to it. I know why you're really here. You want to hear
about when I went viral early this year. I know that, obviously. Guys, dozens of
retweets. Dozens. And it got its own Twitter moment. And I hear they only make
like five of those a year. So it's pretty special. Here's what happens. It was
my birthday. And I don't want to tell you my age, but let's just say that if I
were Jesus, I'd have four years left. It was a rough morning. My girlfriend
lives in London with three dogs and her daughter. And if you've never dated a
single mother, I highly recommend it, especially if you love hearing the
greatest showman soundtrack more than you love your own sanity. Here's how I
would describe the child. You know the book Matilda? Yeah. So like the girl in
Matilda. Yeah. Not her. The headmistress. Like, she's mean. She's really, really
mean. And like, I feel like they forgot my birthday this year because my gift
consisted of a pre-used fidget spinner, which was regifted from a set of four
fidget spinners I gave her for her birthday. We had a bit of an argument and I
was on my way to the airport and I was feeling sad to like have left things on a
bad note. And here's what happens. A field trip of children gets on and they
were all wearing high-vis vests, which they didn't need because there wasn't a
single person on the carriage who didn't immediately know that they were there.
It's 24 children, just like a swarm of children. They're pulling food out of
strangers' hands. They're pointing at people's clothing and saying what they
really think. And they dominated this carriage as soon as they got on. Like one
of them climbs into the seat next to me and the seat wasn't empty. There was a
businessman sitting there. But because of the way public transport in London,
like he doesn't even try to shrug him off. He just like shifts a copy of his
Metro so he could read it over the kid's shoulder. And the kid introduces
himself to me without me asking. And he just starts immediately throwing all
this information at me. He's like, hi, I'm Ben. My favorite color is green. My
favorite football team is Swindon Town. And I'm like, hi, my name's Alex. My
favorite food is raisins. My biggest fear is being buried alive. Because Ben's
got to know that presenting strangers with random information is a two-way
street. And Ben asks how old I am. And I said, I'm 29 years old. And then this
very kid of him, he goes, and how many days? Only two groups of people are
concerned with that. Little children and very old people. Not like old people,
extremely old people. Someone who's like, I'm 107 in 28 days. And if a woman in
France chokes on a bagel, I'm in the top 10. So I tell him I'm zero days old.
I'm 29 in zero days. And he goes, oh, so it's your birthday? And I'm like, yes.
And he goes, where are you going? And this is really dumb of me. I should have
said Heathrow. But I didn't say Heathrow. I just went Terminal 5. As if he was
going to be like, oh, BA International? You're flying BA International? You know
it, Ben. This guy travels too much and creates quite a bit of inconsistency in
his life. And that's the reason an eight-year-old in a Greatest Showman t-shirt
screamed at him this morning. There was no need to tell him the terminal or my
frequent flyer status on BA. But if I can't build a bond with my girlfriend's
daughter, this random eight-year-old is getting it. So he says, are you flying
on your birthday? I'm with my luggage and my jacket. And he's like, are you
flying on your birthday? And I want to be like, no, I'm just going for the
croissants in the lounge, which I do have access to, by the way. And then he
goes, that's sad. And I'm like, why? And he goes, you don't have anyone to sing
happy birthday to you. And then without a second thought, yes, he just launches
it to happy birthday. And the thing that impressed me the most is like, he
didn't like look around to make sure that someone was going to join in. Like if
you ever go into a happy birthday or a hip hip hooray, you're just like, okay,
there are 10 of us. And he just like launches in like if people join in, they
join in. If Kelly and Michelle are with me, that's fine. But if not, I'm
Beyonce. So he sings the song and these children take a break from their ear
splitting, shrieking to join in. And I love this about little children. No one's
like, why are we singing happy birthday? They were like, oh, someone's singing
happy birthday. I guess we're all singing happy birthday. By the way, besides
Ben, no one else knows my name. So they get to the third line and it's utter
chaos. And one kid just goes, happy birthday, dear tall guy, and they finish and
everyone claps. That's not true. No one cares. Obviously no one cares. Londoners
are ice cold on public transport. Do you guys want to loosen up or something?
Like you know the blitz is over, right? But ever like no one's looking up from
their phones or their newspapers. They couldn't give a crap. The teacher does
the most British thing I've ever seen. This is what she says when they finish
singing. She goes, well done, boys. That was very in key. Which was just such
classic British understatement. You should be so proud of these kids. Like, is
there any better example of like how great a job you're doing as a teacher than
like these kids just spontaneously like, we're going to sing happy birthday.
We'll sing happy birthday to him. And by the way, the kids kept selling out
their teacher because a bit beforehand, Ben had said to me, he said, do you have
a girlfriend? And I said, yes. And he went, that's a shame because miss is very
lonely. And right away she was like, Ben, Ben, Ben, Ben, Ben, I'm not lonely.
I'm living life on my terms. Anyway, the song ends. I'm holding back tears,
obviously. One of the kids goes, it doesn't take much to make someone smile,
which is a nice sentiment that he got from either good parenting or just like a
coffee mug that he saw somewhere. And one of the other kids ruins the moment
immediately because he says out loud, he isn't smiling. He's almost crying. Look
at him. And by the way, if you're wondering what makes Londoners look up from
their phones on public transport, they're just like, Oh, someone's about to cry.
The songs of children, absolutely not. Stranger than tears. 100%. I didn't cry
on the train. I cried half an hour later into a croissant in the BA lounge.
Here's Brandon again. I think there needs to be a balance. Everybody I meet is
either too earnest or too ironic. Yeah, I genuinely feel that way. So I tend to
like trend more to the ironic side of tweeting because like, I don't love
earnestness, but I was at the airport and I'm feeling like incredibly grateful
to these kids and like emotionally fragile. Cause that's like a hundred soldier
baseball dads. Like that's them. That's like a dog being reunited with its
owner. And they're like both in a wheelchair. Like I was misty eyed for like the
rest of the day. So I decided like, I'm going to tweet the story. I don't like
earnest tweets. I really don't like earnest tweets, especially because my
brother, AJ, did an earnest tweet and like, I felt so weird about it. Here's
what you need to know about AJ. AJ's an Olympian, a genuine Olympian. Like this
is not a joke. It is eventually, but like, I know you're like your brother's an
Olympian. Yes. If you're wondering, it's nurture. AJ qualified for the Olympics
for Israel in a sport called skeleton. I'm sure you have a few questions. Your
brother qualified for the Olympics? Yes. The winter Olympics? Yes. For Israel?
Yes. Does Israel even have a winter? Not really. He had to train in Germany and
what must be the irony to end all ironies. What is skeleton? A good question.
Luge is where you go feet first down an ice chute at 160 kilometers an hour
riding a lunch tray. Skeleton is someone who looked at Luge and was like, feet
first? Are we pussies? Let's go head first. And they used to call it head first
Luge, but then a bunch of people died and they're like, let's just call people
we come. Now AJ didn't win gold, but you'll agree that making the Olympics like
that is a hell of an achievement. Getting on the podium is an incredible
achievement, which is why I'm delighted to tell you that AJ came in 27th place.
Just nine podiums back. Bear with me, but if you constructed a giant super
podium with three podiums on each level of the podium and then three podiums on
each of those levels, AJ would be on the smallest step of the smallest podium
and the smallest podium on the super podium. But even so, like he's an athlete
that's like performed at the highest level. It's not any wonder that my parents
aren't impressed that like I am verified and going semi viral on Twitter because
they don't know what any of that means. He's an Olympian and he'll always be an
Olympian and most Olympians get Olympic rings like tattooed on their body, but
we're Jewish and so we don't get tattoos. So instead of getting that tattoo, AJ
has decided to become insufferable. And the reason I feel comfortable making fun
of my brother is because I'm like genuinely in awe of his success. Like he put
himself through more for like this achievement than I've ever put myself through
for anything. And that's an inspiration. And I don't think I'll ever have that
chance unless there's like some really horrible admin error or it's the
hilarious premise behind Cool Runnings 2, the frozen chosen. On the middle of
all this, I don't think I gave credit to like the stress that my brother might
be going through, like since the Olympics ended and he tweeted something. He
tweeted, I'm having a tough time since the Olympics. I feel very empty. This is
a real life crisis for me. That was the tweet he put out into the world. He's
having a life crisis because there's no bigger stage for him to like achieve or
perform on. I think it's really tough for Olympians. I think it's tough for like
high achieving people who achieve a thing. Like in the States, companies are
always bragging about the amount of Olympians they hire. Home Depot, which is
like our B&Q, this is 100% true, keeps bragging about all the Olympians they've
managed to get working in their stores. And I feel bad for Olympians who have to
take these jobs. One guy's like, oh, thank God I trained all those years in
Javelin so I could throw this Amazon Prime package over someone's wall. The
earnestness bothered me a little. I just wished he mixed in just like a tiny bit
of irony. He just tweeted like, things have been pretty tough since the
Olympics. I'm going downhill fast. Not as fast as 26 other people, but still
going downhill. So anyway, I do my earnest tweets at this airport about what
happens on the tube. And then I get on the plane and I switch my phone to
airplane mode as soon as the safety demonstration comes on. And I get to LA nine
hours later and I switch my phone on and I've got thousands of notifications on
my phone. And my first thought genuinely was like, oh no, Justine Sacco. Hashtag
has Alex landed yet? And now I can't see how something bad could have happened
to me, but you know, I got paranoid. Like you can get paranoid, obviously like
the stunts backfired. My girlfriend's dumped me. Miss Stevens has been fired.
Ben has been taken out of school because of all the bullying. BA has stripped me
of my lounge access and freaking flyer miles. That hasn't happened though.
Obviously most of the responses are very positive. People are like praising the
kids and their teacher, but there was some criticism. People were criticizing
the kids. I called the kids heroes because I was like still feeling misty eyed.
And someone was like, oh, you think these kids are heroes? Like our troops? And
I was like, no, they're nothing like our troops. They don't have any blood on
their hands. Like these children. There's a mixed bag. Cause on one hand there
was a backlash against the earnestness, which maybe there should be. But on the
other hand, I've connected with the school and their teacher and like we've been
in touch. It's been really wonderful. And the teacher used the reaction to it
for the classes, like a teachable moment, by the way, that is some really good
educating, right? Miss is very good. And if she is single, it definitely is
because she's living life on her terms. That's the end of this episode of peer
group. The internet is like a gun, so be careful with it. And Ben, if you and
your class are listening, same time, same place next year, March the 20th,
Piccadilly line. And if you're in key, y'all get fidget spinners. Good night.
Thank you very much. I'm Alex Edelman. Alex Edelman's peer group was written by
Alex Edelman with additional material by Ivo Grant. My peer group was Brandon
Wardell, Jack Knight and David Burstein. The producer was Sam Michelle and it
was a BBC Studios production. And you can catch up on the series so far on BBC
sounds. Alex and his friends will be back here on Radio 4 at the same time next
week when the subject up for discussion will be politics. And aptly enough,
that's what we're turning our attention to next this evening with today in
Parliament. But before that, here's Helen Lewis to tell us about the new series
of The Spark. Welcome to The Spark. I feel like the monkeys are juggling
chainsaws. They're juggling flaming torches, but they could just as well be
juggling chainsaws. The monkeys might be hypothetical, but the issues are real.
Part of what we need to be well is a world that we can feel that we belong to.
I'm Helen Lewis, back with a new series of big conversations, talking to people
who bring radical new thinking to vital questions like when to quit, social
prescribing, scientific fraud and preventing suicide. Small acts of reaching
out, small acts of interrupting those thoughts could be life saving. The Spark
starts next Tuesday morning at 11 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. And in that opening
episode, Helen will be talking to the author Rory O'Connor about his new
approach to suicide prevention. That's The Spark next Tuesday morning at 11. Now
on Radio 4 to Westminster, where Labour sets out its plan for tackling staff
shortages in the NHS. Today, in Parliament. Order. Order. Good evening, this is
Susan Hume at Westminster, where Labour says the government must fund more
doctors training places. It is an absurdity that people are coming to this
country to study in medical schools that have no British students. A minister
defends Boris Johnson despite the need to rework his Northern Ireland Brexit
deal. But for him, we would never have left the EU as the public requested in a
referendum. And a charity describes how drugs gangs are recruiting ever younger
children. This week we've had a referral of an eight year old and that eight
year old has been enticed with magazines and sweets. But first, Labour has
called for a doubling of doctors training places to tackle the workforce
shortages in the NHS. The party's shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, said
it was the depths of stupidity that students with straight A's were being turned
away from university medical schools while the health service was short of 9,000
hospital doctors in England. The government pays the upfront costs of medical
training places, which are also subsidised by overseas students. In a debate
called by Labour, Wes Streeting said he welcomed international students, but...
There are medical schools in England today which are exclusively training
international students, many of whom will leave upon graduating, while at the
same time we're turning away thousands of straight A students from our own
country who want to help the NHS. Brunel University is training 100 new doctors,
not a single UK student. Labour's plan is to train 15,000 medical doctors a
year, alongside a big expansion of health visitors and nurses, including
district nurses and midwives. It would be paid for by abolishing the non-DOM tax
status, which allows some people to pay no tax on their overseas income. A
Labour MP, Graham Morris, interrupted to say it was incredible that the
government didn't seem to have a plan for dealing with cancer. Particularly at a
time when 50,000 patients a month are having to wait more than two weeks between
diagnosis and seeing a specialist. We need a plan that incorporates workforce
recruitment and retention. Wes Streeting agreed. As I know from personal
experience of going to A&E with something else, it is often in accident and
emergency departments that cancer is detected. And I worry, Mr Deputy Speaker,
how many cancer patients like me arrive at A&E, see the waiting times and walk
away with the cancer undiagnosed. The Health Minister, Helen Whateley, didn't
want to pre-empt either next month's budget or the forthcoming NHS workforce
plan. But she reminded Wes Streeting of Jeremy Hunt's track record on NHS
training. It was this government, indeed the current Chancellor when he was the
Health Secretary, which expanded medical school places from around 6,000 each
year to over 7,500. A 25% increase in just three years. In fact, it was such a
substantial expansion that it also saw the creation of five new medical schools
in England. She wasn't convinced by Labour's idea of how to fund more doctors.
When it comes to the spring budget, what I can guarantee to the House is that
our sums will add up, unlike those of the gentleman opposite, who seems to be
banking on what he believes will be an inexhaustible pot of non-DOM taxation.
Speaking for the SNP, Philippa Whitford said that even when staffing increased,
demand increased faster. And that was because the population was ageing and not
ageing well. Many people, particularly in deprived communities, can spend 20 or
more years in ill health and the NHS is struggling to cope with that. That's why
we actually need to invest in a wellbeing approach to every person who lives in
the UK, every child born, so they don't end up like a bunch of old crocs like
many of us are in this chamber. A few MPs visibly bridled at that. A
Conservative, Aaron Bell, sounded irritated by Labour's attack. I do think it's
pretty rich to be lectured by the opposition, given the backlogs they left in
2010, when they had no Covid to contend with. There's no mention of Covid in the
debate. They left a 20,000 backlog in elective surgery that this government and
successive governments got down. One moment, I'll finish the point first. Which
this government got down to a thousand. Heckles there from Labour MPs who didn't
recognise his figures. A couple of MPs argued that it wasn't just doctors and
nurses, but dentists that were in short supply. Labour's Andrew Western had a
young constituent who'd been waiting almost two years to be referred to an
orthodontist. Only to be told when finally referred that the waiting list for
treatment is some two to four years. She's almost 15. She's in near constant
pain at the back of her jaw. This causes her headaches and her overcrowded teeth
are also affecting her mentally and socially at a difficult age. When her
parents explain this, they are told to give her painkillers to manage the
problem. Painkillers for up to four years. And the Lib Dem Daisy Cooper said the
terms of their contract meant few dentists were taking on NHS patients, even
young ones. Children's life chances are being set back because of the impact of
poor oral health. Our children need good teeth more than anybody else to set
them up for later in life. But eight in 10 NHS dental practices are not taking
on children. Daisy Cooper. Labour's motion on increasing the NHS workforce was
carried because Conservative MPs didn't take part in the vote, but it has no
binding effect on the government. Well MPs have been told that children as young
as seven or eight are being groomed into working for drugs gangs with offers of
magazines and sweets. Others are being targeted through social media or online
gaming. David Cornick reports. MPs on the Education Committee are looking at
ways of protecting vulnerable children from being manipulated by county lines
gangs, criminal networks that export illegal drugs from one area to another. The
gangs often use children to transport drugs across police and local authority
boundaries. Experts agree that it's a growing problem. Johnny Balderson from
Catch 22 runs a support and rescue service for exploited children. They would
have been exploited and groomed at 15, maybe even younger. We've seen people,
drug runners at seven now, who are involved in these gangs because it's getting
younger and younger and younger. And Rebecca Griffiths from Barnardo's revealed
how children were targeted. It's not just money and I'll give you an example
this week we've had a referral of an eight-year-old and that eight-year-old has
been enticed with magazines and sweets. That gift would then have to be repaid.
We had another child that we referred in this week who was given a subway and as
a lunch they couldn't afford their lunch and they were given the subway and then
they were told they had to repay the debt and then that's how it starts with the
smallest small numbers and that's why I think and certainly from Barnardo's we
think we are getting younger children who are being enticed in with things that
they don't have at the moment because of the cost of living crisis. Johnny
Balderson said children were being recruited in new ways through gaming or
social media. There's an advert I've seen that was on Snapchat, it was on
Instagram and the young person, it was an advert for young people to get
involved in County Alliance. This advert looked like it was professionally done,
it looked like a music video, it looked like something you'd see on TV every day
and if I'm a young person who is struggling economically with my family, my
family's stressed, I'm seeing this advert that looks professionally done I'm
almost thinking actually this must be legal because it looks so good, it must
be. Labour's Kim Johnson was concerned about the way very young children were
being targeted. What support should be available for young people in terms of
the transition from primary to secondary school in terms of levels of
exploitation? Johnny Balderson said support outside school would help. We are
seeing someone who's possibly seven who is a drug runner now maybe and then they
obviously go from junior school to secondary school. I think there is a need for
a buffer to sort of get them to help them understand what they're going to be
expected to see at secondary school, what they experience, understanding their
relationships. A Conservative, Nick Fletcher, had another suggestion. Do you
think a complete ban on mobile phones in schools would help? As a father he said
he used to check what was on his children's phones. I know obviously they can
switch the phones on before they go to school and when they come out of school,
if you did ban it in school it would at least take 25 hours, maybe 30 hours a
week away where they weren't contactable. Johnny Balderson thought he had a
point. I think the pandemic really pushed young people and vulnerable people to
online gaming. You think about it, they had nearly two years focusing on what to
do so they went to online gaming, exactly where exploiters and groomers want
that person to be. Susanna Drury from the charity Missing People thought
criminals could find a way around a school phone ban. If school is proving to be
a barrier for the exploiters, we've worked with young people where the exploiter
is there at the school gate in a car ready to take them away so whether or not
they've got their phone is one thing but we also know that exploiters can create
situations to help make sure that young person gets excluded so they're away
from the safety net of school. A Conservative, Miriam Cates, looked at what made
children more vulnerable. How much is family breakdown an issue? I mean we've
got the highest rate of family breakdown in the OECD now. We've got 44% of
children now experience that, that's an awful lot of kids not living with
biological mum and dad and having experienced the trauma of that breakup. How
much is that a factor in children being at risk? Johnny Balderson agreed. If
you're a young person coming home and your mum and dad are arguing or your mum's
substance misuse or anything like that, you will turn to your phone, you will
turn to social media, you will turn to online gaming, you will turn to anyone
else who will make you a part of something, your family, which is obviously an
OECD criminalised gang, will be a family to them. Rebecca Griffiths from
Barnardo's highlighted another issue. We are seeing an emerging kind of trend
where children are being targeted who are from families who are professionals,
so they might be out of shift work, police, nurses and there are, you know,
again, like I said before, traffickers will do anything to make sure that their
business is going well. And she said some children became involved because they
wanted to provide for their family if they were struggling financially. David
Cornock there. Labour has said the new trading arrangements in Northern Ireland
unveiled by the Prime Minister on Monday are an admission of the mistakes and
lack of honesty from the government during the original Brexit negotiations.
Labour's leader in the Lords, Lady Smith, recalled the assurances given by Boris
Johnson when the Northern Ireland protocol was agreed three years ago. That
there would be no forms, no checks, no barriers of any kind on goods crossing
the Irish Sea post-Brexit were not based in reality. And who can forget his
flamboyant promise to an audience of Northern Ireland business people that they
should call him if anyone tried to get them to complete a form. That was not
just wrong, but the lack of honesty was disrespectful to those who had raised
legitimate concerns. She was speaking after the Prime Minister's common
statement on the new Windsor framework was repeated in the House of Lords. The
Labour leader, Sakir Starmer, has welcomed the new system and Lady Smith said it
proved that complex trade issues were best resolved through diplomacy. Not
unilateral action or headline-seeking bluster. We welcome the Prime Minister's
change of approach. And we welcome the Mr Sunak now has, as part of the
agreement, finally committed not to proceed with the Northern Ireland protocol
bill. That bill would have paved the way for the UK to abandon unilaterally its
deal with the EU on Northern Ireland. Rishi Sunak has announced that the
legislation has been ditched. Lady Smith said the Windsor framework wasn't
perfect, but it represented a significant step forward. The Prime Minister's
statement is admission that the government made mistakes in the negotiating and
signing of the protocol. And that there was a lack of honesty. The Lib Dem
leader in the Lords, Lord Newby, said the Windsor framework represented an
outbreak of common sense on both sides. For months, the wrangling over the
protocol has taken up a huge amount of time and political capital. It
preoccupied your Lordship's House with the Northern Ireland protocol bill. And
it acted as a blockage to constructive engagement between the UK and the EU on a
range of other issues which had absolutely nothing to do with the protocol
itself. And he hoped the framework would reset the UK's relationship with the EU
in order to mitigate some of the other costs of Brexit. Speaking for the
government, Lord True called it a moment of opportunity and hoped it would lead
to the restoration of the institutions in Northern Ireland. And he spoke up for
Boris Johnson. I have to leave on the record that but for him we would never
have left the EU as the public requested in a referendum. And we should also
remember that the Northern Ireland protocol with all its imperfections was born
of a situation where this house and the other house, a majority in both those
houses was seeking to frustrate that. Supporters of the Northern Ireland
protocol bill saw it as a way to put pressure on the EU. The minister didn't
come down on one side or the other. We will have to leave it to the memoir
writers of the future to know about the motivations why people come to the
negotiating table or not. My Lords I'm not so certain as others might have been
whether the Northern Ireland protocol bill had an effect or not. But I don't
believe that is fruitful subject for debate. The DUP hasn't come to a settled
view on the Windsor framework. Lord Dodds who used to be the leader of the DUP
at Westminster said the crucial question was whether people in Northern Ireland
were denied equal status with people in the rest of the UK. Now overnight we
have had some more greater analysis. Some of the unhelpful exaggeration around
the deal has been stripped away. So for accuracy can the leader for whom I have
great personal respect indeed confirm to what extent Northern Ireland will
continue to be governed by EU laws and subject to EU legal jurisdiction for
large parts of our economy for which no consent has ever been sought or given.
The minister replied that 1700 pages of EU law would be removed and that about
3% of EU law would remain in relation to goods which he said may bring some
advantages to the people of Northern Ireland. You're listening to Today in
Parliament with me Susan Hume. Still to come a young Labour MP remembers her
childhood hero. At the nursery that I went to you were allowed to go and fancy
dress on your birthday and I demanded that my parents allow me to dress as Betty
Boothroyd. But first MPs have called on the Energy Security Secretary to end for
good the practice of forcing people to have pre-payment meters in their homes.
But Grant Shapps insisted he'd acted quickly when the problem came to light.
Here's Mandy Baker. The practice of force fitting pre-payment meters has been
temporarily stopped by the energy regulator Ofgem after it emerged that debt
agents working for British Gas broke into vulnerable people's homes to install
them. But the six week pause only lasts until the end of March. Labour's Dan
Carden set out the situation as he saw it. Where we're up to is there is a
suspension until the 31st of March. Compensation has been talked about. All that
is is Ofgem asking companies to look at whether the forced instalment was
appropriate. Companies know that Ofgem is toothless. It stands for the Secretary
of State to ban this practice and to set out how compensation will be given out.
The Energy Security Secretary Grant Shapps says he'd received assurances that
suppliers would end the practice. Also... I asked Ofgem, who I have to say I
thought Wall had been pulled over their eyes, not just to take the energy
company's word for it but to go to the customers which they're doing and I
queried the fact that the courts were issuing mass warrants which they have
agreed to end. Labour's Ruth Jones accused the government of ducking its
responsibilities and relying on Ofgem to do the right thing. How can it be right
that the installation of prepayment meters will recommence again at the end of
March? Why should those with the least have to pay the most to keep their homes
and keep the lights on? Grant Shapps said the government wasn't ducking
responsibility but the Labour onslaught wasn't over. Paula Barker was next to
her feet. The government seems to cower from taking the big energy companies on
and as they continue to rip off the British people, will the benches opposite
finally act to protect those households and force energy firms to pay out and
compensate now rather than at the end of the Ofgem review? The minister insisted
a government soft on energy providers wouldn't impose. The 75% taxation which is
at a level designed to ensure that we've been able to support in part that 50%
reduction in people's household bills. A Conservative, Richard Fuller, felt
Ofgem had a lot to answer for. He accused it of blundering around with the price
cap and spending billions of pounds of taxpayers' money bailing out failing
energy companies. Surely it is time to say why is the chief executive remaining
in post and can we please have better oversight of this regulator and other
regulators in general? They're getting away with ripping off consumers and
allowing companies to do exactly the same. Grant Shapps said he'd always called
Ofgem out when he'd been concerned and his department kept a close eye on what
the regulator did. Labour's shadow climate change secretary Ed Miliband was
worried about the consequences of another rise in bills in April. If it goes
ahead, the number of people in fuel poverty will jump by almost two million. He
wanted the energy minister, Amanda Soloway, to tell the chancellor to cancel the
rise. She had this response. Just to reiterate that this government has been
looking at this incredibly closely and that the analysis so far for 2022 shows
that 350,000 households in England were kept out of fuel poverty. Ed Miliband
wasn't satisfied with that answer. He said people didn't want sympathy and warm
words. The government is saying it can't afford to do any more to help families
but at the same time they refuse a proper windfall tax and bung billions of
pounds in handouts to the oil and gas companies. Isn't the truth, isn't the
truth, Mr Speaker, that the reason people are sick and tired of this government
is that they put the balance sheets of fossil fuel companies ahead of the family
budgets of the British people? Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to remind the
right honourable gentleman that we have been paying half of household energy
bills and that we actually will continue to look at this. Amanda Soloway wasn't
the only Conservative fending off attacks from the former Labour leader. Ed
Miliband noted that the last Prime Minister but one, Boris Johnson, was in the
chamber. It's important to welcome ex-party leaders to their place, Mr Speaker,
but my only piece of advice is it's important to not want your old job back.
Boris Johnson heckled something in return but unfortunately we couldn't hear
what it was. Mandy Baker reporting. Labour has claimed that millions of people
who want to work are unable to find a job because of ill health. The Shadow Work
and Pension Secretary, Jonathan Ashworth, said economic inactivity rates had
increased in the UK since the pandemic. Now some of this is early retirement
amongst the over 50s but an increasingly common reason for leaving the labour
market is sickness and when we consider both the numbers unemployed and the
numbers inactive who say they would want help working, there are around three
million people workless in this country who could be in jobs. He said the hidden
unemployment rate was more than three times the official rate. The Work and
Pension Secretary, Mel Stride, is currently reviewing ways of getting more long-
term sick, disabled and older people back into the workforce and he set out what
the government was doing to encourage those who've retired early to go back to
work. We've focused on our midlife guarantee to make sure that those of that age
are confident in the work that they're seeking, understand the skills gaps that
they may have and critically have looked closely at whether their finances are
such that they can indeed survive comfortably through to the end of their lives
and whether perhaps taking work now would not be a bad thing. Chris Stevens for
the SNP suggested one way to get more disabled people into work would be to
incentivise employers to help staff work from home. Now multi-storey car parks
should be staffed round the clock and the law changed to require higher barriers
to prevent people falling or jumping from the upper levels. A Labour MP, Maria
Eagle, called for the change following the death of her 15-year-old constituent,
Gabriel Santer, in October 2020 on what she said was a bleak, wet and windy
Saturday night. She said safety at multi-storey car parks was a serious problem.
At least 17 people had fallen to their deaths from them in England last year.
The building regulation requirements for the height of barriers set a minimum
height for guarding the rooftop of only 1.1 metres, just around three feet. That
is too low to stop anyone from accidentally falling. It's certainly too low to
stop anyone determined to jump. Multi-storey car parks must be attractive to
those seeking to take their own lives. They're easily accessible. One can reach
the top floor easily. Maria Eagle, who wanted a change to building regulations
to ensure higher barriers on new and existing car parks. Now, MPs have been
remembering the former Commons Speaker, Betty Boothroyd, following her death at
the age of 93. She became Speaker in 1992 and served for eight years before
moving to the House of Lords. Sean Curran reports. Betty Boothroyd made history
when she was elected as the first ever female Speaker. The current occupant of
the chair, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, spoke of widespread shock and sadness at her
death. He said Lady Boothroyd, as she became, was one of a kind. Not only the
first woman Speaker, but a force to be reckoned with. One of Betty's trademark
appeals to members who took too long to get their words out during Prime
Minister's questions was, time's up! Well Madam Speaker, we are devastated that
your time is up. But on behalf of us all, you will never be forgotten. You made
history. So please, rest in peace. The Conservative former Prime Minister,
Theresa May, said the first woman Speaker in 700 years would always have her
place in history. But she said MPs who'd been in the Chamber during Betty
Boothroyd's time in the chair would remember the way she'd carried out her role.
She always knew the point at which it was right to intervene with a witty
remark, a sense of humour, a gentle put-down of a Member of Parliament, or a
strong rebuke. And from Betty, the rebukes could be very strong. The longest-
serving female MP, or Mother of the House, the Labour former Cabinet Minister
Harriet Harman, said this was a sad but proud moment. A proud moment for all of
us women in the House. She was the first and only woman Speaker, and she was
brilliant in the chair. A proud moment for Labour, as a woman from a working-
class Yorkshire background who blazed a trail for Labour in politics. And a
proud moment for the House. She was an icon for Parliament. She was admired and
respected not only in this country but also abroad. She said Speaker Boothroyd
had ruled the Commons with a rod of iron. She expected the House to be
boisterous, but she had no time for oafish, loutish behaviour. When a Tory MP,
Tony Marlow, shouted across the House that I was a stupid cow, he made a big
mistake, not that it wasn't that everybody else was saying it, but Betty heard
him. He was right over there, she was in the chair, but she heard him. She
forced him to withdraw those words, ruling that stupid cow was unparliamentary
language. Another Labour former Minister, Dame Margaret Hodge, also had strong
memories of Speaker Boothroyd keeping MPs in order. It was tough to be a woman
in the House when she was first elected, one of 23 women MPs. And she was, I
think, one of the generation who felt they had to outperform the men, really, to
make any progress. I wouldn't describe her as a sister, but I do remember that
she was responsible for the most revolutionary thing in those days. She
introduced vending machines to sell tights. Another Labour member, Charlotte
Nicholls, said she had absolutely idolised Betty Boothroyd when she was a child.
There's a picture of me on my fourth birthday, where we were allowed, at the
nursery that I went to, you were allowed to go and fancy dress on your birthday,
and I demanded that my parents allow me to dress as Betty Boothroyd to go into
nursery that day. As I said, she was an idol. Ms Nicholls became an MP in 2019,
but she never actually met Betty Boothroyd. There was one occasion when I was a
newly elected MP where she came into the tea room and I saw her and absolutely
kind of welled up. I was so kind of starstruck by seeing in the flesh this woman
who had had such a profound impact on my life that I just, I couldn't get
anything out. I couldn't even introduce myself to say hello. And she reflected
that it was important for people, if they got the chance to meet their heroes,
to say hello and tell them how much they meant to them. Ah, Sean Curran
reporting. And before we go, our main news again. Labour has called for a
doubling of doctors' training places, saying some medical schools have been
allowed to recruit no UK students at all. I'm Susan Hulme. The studio manager
was Neva Masirian, the editor was Christina Cooper. And that was Today in
Parliament.