TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 We're in the editorial seats for us from Amal and me. BBC News at nine o'clock.
The government is meeting officials from the Royal College of Nursing today to
start what have been described as intensive talks on pay, terms and conditions.
The union has suspended a planned forty-eight hour strike in England next week.
The RCN had originally asked for a pay rise of five percent above inflation and
has since said it would be willing to settle halfway. Pat Cullen is its general
secretary. I've always said I wouldn't negotiate in public. The Prime Minister
has now got the table prepared. We will be there and we will enter those
negotiations in good faith and we will make sure that no stone's left unturned
to make sure that that fair pay deal is reached as quickly as possible so that
we can bring a conclusion to these strikes. President Biden will hold talks in
Poland later with NATO leaders from Eastern Europe to discuss the war in
Ukraine. China's most senior diplomat and Russia's security chief have been
meeting in Moscow and said they opposed unilateral bullying from other countries
and that they were promoting peace and stability. Data from police shows
paedophiles are starting to use virtual reality headsets to view child abuse
images. Use of the technology was recorded in eight cases in England and Wales
in the most recent yearly figures, the first time VR has been specifically
mentioned. Shamima Begum is due to find out this morning whether she's allowed
back to the UK. She was 15 when she and two other girls from East London
travelled to Syria to join the so-called Islamic State in 2015. The Special
Immigration Appeals Commission will give a written judgment on whether she
should win back her British citizenship. Sir Tony Blair and Lord Hague are
calling for everyone in the UK to be given a digital ID. The former Prime
Minister and ex-Conservative leader want a pass incorporating a person's
passport, driving licence, tax records, qualifications and right to work. They
say technology needs to be at the heart of public services. BBC News. This is
BBC Radio 4. Coming up over on our sister station, Five Live now, Nikki Campbell
is discussing family estrangement after speaking to the daughter of the man who
abused him at school. Meanwhile, back here on BBC Radio 4 FM, in half an hour,
we find out how lifting weights can boost your mood, your heart health, your
brain and even reverse signs of ageing in your muscles. That's in just one thing
with Dr Michael Mosley. And today's Woman's Hour investigates why black women
are more likely to get late cancer diagnoses. Woman's Hour, usual time, just
after the news at ten. Now though, here's Tim Harford. Hello and welcome to More
or Less, the grammatical stickler of the statistical world. This week, our inbox
was overflowing with suggested corrugenda, and not just about the data datums
thing, although mostly about that. We invite a computational linguist to bring
the data about data. And we have a corrugendum about nurses' pay. We'll also be
asking how much money you might raise if you tax rich Welsh people. And are
there really 13 million menopausal women in the UK? But first, our next story
begins, as do all good stories, with Justice Secretary Dominic Raab sending a
tweet. Reoffending rates have fallen by over two percentage points since the
same period last year, to 23.1%, down from almost 31% in 2009-10. This shows
that our investment in drug rehab, training in prisons and offender employment,
is working and helping make our streets safer. That was in October, and the rate
now is very slightly higher. But overall, reoffending rates are down from around
30% ten years ago, into the low 20s today. This all sounds like good news, but
it's also a bit surprising. Historically, reoffending rates don't tend to move
very much. To get a deeper understanding of what this all means, we spoke to
Danny Shaw, now an independent policing and crime commentator, but for many
years before that, a home affairs correspondent at the BBC. The reoffending rate
isn't really the reoffending rate. The reoffending rate is really the proportion
of people who have been released from prison, or who are sentenced at court to a
community order or given a fine, who within 12 months of that event, commit
another offence for which they are convicted or given a caution within that 12
months or a six-month follow-up period. So, as an example, if you're released
from prison and not convicted of a crime, cautioned or given a police warning
within 18 months, then you encounter someone who is a reoffending success. Of
course, that doesn't mean all these people are back on the straight and narrow.
Some may be back to their criminal ways, but just haven't been caught. So it's
not really reoffending, it's really reconviction or recautioning. Really? So,
hmm, I think if the government called it the reconviction rate, I'm not sure
they would be bragging that it was falling. Well, that's exactly my point. So a
six percentage point drop would be significant if it was really a drop in
reoffending, but it's actually a drop in reconvictions and recautioning. I
accept that as a matter of definition, what we are measuring is recautions and
reconvictions, but do we know that that is because the police and the courts are
being less effective at getting convictions and or delivering cautions rather
than because fewer crimes are being committed? Well, I think the first thing to
say is that the government hasn't presented any evidence, any cause and effect
evidence to say that the fall in reoffending rates is because of something that
they are doing in terms of rehabilitation or better schemes in prison or on
probation. That's the first thing. The second thing is, if you look at some
separate data from the Home Office, which show the outcomes of offences. So what
happens to a crime after it's reported and recorded by the police in England and
Wales? What those figures show is that charge rates, the proportion of crimes
that result in a suspect being charged or summons to appear in court, have
plummeted. They have gone down by 10 percentage points from 2014-15, which was a
year when the figures started to be calculated in a different way, to the latest
set of figures, which for the 12 months ending in September 2022. So a 10
percentage point fall from 15.5% to 5.5% crimes resulting in a charge. I mean,
that's a huge fall. It's a huge fall and you can't have a conviction without
someone being charged. So the conviction rate is going to be even lower. We've
also seen a significant fall in the proportion of crimes which result in a
caution, a simple caution, which has gone from 4.6% down to 1% since 2014-15. So
that's a 3.6 percentage point drop. So if the proportion of crimes that are
leading to cautions and convictions is falling, then surely that must be having
an impact on the proportion of offenders who are re-cautioned and re-convicted.
Just to rephrase those numbers, you've got a situation of eight years ago, out
of every seven offences committed, one would result in a charge. And now it's
out of every 20 offences committed, one would result in a charge. I mean, that's
just an apocalyptic fall. It's a huge fall and it's a real worry. The well-
regarded Crime Survey of England and Wales suggests that crime overall is
falling, as the Ministry of Justice pointed out to us when we approached them
for comment. But this doesn't change the fact that the number of charges and
cautions has fallen dramatically, dragging down the charge rate. So why is this
happening? I think you have to look at the long-term trends. And I think what
we're seeing, firstly, is that there is a changing mix of offences. And so we're
actually seeing a record number of sexual offences. The sexual offences are more
complex in many cases to investigate and to solve. They take longer. I think one
of the key reasons is that the number of police officers fell dramatically. From
2010, when it stood at almost 144,000 across England and Wales, to 2019, there
was a drop of around 21,000 police officers. And that has clearly had an impact
on the police service's capacity and capability to deal with this volume of
offences and a mix of more complex offences that take longer to investigate and
solve. It's always been the case that some people will get away with it. And
it's always been the case that there are probably some crimes that are just
impossible to solve, or you're just not going to get the resources in place to
solve every shoplifting or every minor fraud. But to have a charge rate that has
fallen to 5.5% and a cautioning rate that's down to 1% really just suggests that
criminals have a licence to get away with it. Our thanks to Danny Shaw. We put
his points to the Ministry of Justice. They did draw our attention to an
increase in police officers. Add 20,000 extra police officers, expansion of
electronic tags and work to get offenders off drugs, off the streets and into
jobs will help cut re-offending further. Now you may remember Danny Shaw said
the number of police officers had fallen by 21,000. So you might wonder how
these figures can both be true. The 21,000 fall was a fall in full-time
equivalent police officers between 2010 and 2019. That actually happened. The
20,000 extra police officers was a manifesto pledge in 2019 and it hasn't
actually happened yet. In the most recent figures from January, the government
has so far managed to recruit an extra 16,700 police officers. But the Ministry
of Justice didn't engage with Danny Shaw's argument that falling re-offending
rates may be a reflection of the police bringing fewer charges and issuing fewer
cautions. You're listening to More or Less. In mid-January, Radio 4's Any
Questions came from Newport in Wales. One of the panellists was Vaughan Gething,
Minister for the Economy of Wales, and he was asked about whether the Welsh
Government would consider raising taxes to give extra funding to the health
service in Wales. You talk about 10 years of austerity. Of course the Welsh
Government does have tax raising powers it could use to raise more money for the
NHS. Is that something you're considering? Vaughan Gething responded. The
challenge is that we don't think we can raise enough, fairly enough, to have a
long-term funding settlement for the service. And some of this is about the pay
context. Now that is both about how would we do that. The tax base for higher
earlies in Wales is actually really small. There are 9,000 higher rate
taxpayers. You'd have to ask basic tax rate payers, virtually everyone, to pay
lots more. Phil Jones from North Wales was listening and was surprised to hear
only 9,000 people in Wales pay the higher tax rate. He asked us, can this be
true? Well we asked Nathan Gower, More or Less reporter, and a man whose name
sounds Welsh, even if he actually isn't. Hi Tim, I should say that I do have a
Welsh auntie though. Hello Auntie Bev. Focus Nathan, focus. What is going on
here? OK, prologue. The income tax bands in Wales are the same as in England.
First, the basic rate. That goes from £12,500 up to £50,000 at a rate of 20%.
Then there's the higher rate, which goes from £50,000 to £150,000 at a rate of
40%. Then finally there's the additional rate of tax, which is the top rate of
tax for those earning £150,000 and above at 45%. That's fairly new, it was
introduced in 2010, and before that the higher rate actually was the highest
rate. The Welsh Government has the power to raise whichever of these different
rates it wants. It could put the basic rate up to 21% for example, or the higher
rate up to 41. But unlike Scotland, it can't choose the income levels at which
the different tax rates kick in, giving it less flexibility when raising tax
revenue. OK, that all makes sense, but what about this claim that there are only
9,000 higher rate taxpayers? That sounds very low. Yes, that figure is wrong.
Vaughan Gething misspoke. He should have said there were 9,000 additional rate
taxpayers. OK, well, sounds like an honest mistake. These things happen,
especially since the higher rate isn't actually the top rate of tax anymore, so
it's a bit of a silly name. But it makes me wonder, Nathan, how many of these
40p rate or higher rate taxpayers are there in Wales? There are 166,000 higher
rate taxpayers in Wales. Now, I know what you're going to ask, is that a big
number? Well, not really. There are 1.5 million people who pay income tax in
Wales, so that means only 11% of Welsh income taxpayers earn enough to pay the
higher rate. But if you look at England, then by comparison, 16% of income
taxpayers are in the higher rate tax bracket. And what about the additional
rate? Again, Wales has a much smaller proportion. Only 0.6% of Welsh taxpayers
are in the additional rate bracket, while in England that proportion is over
three times as large. It's 2%. Wales has proportionally less income to tax than
England. What this means is that, as Vaughan Gething said, in order to raise a
substantial sum of extra money for the health service, or anything else, you'd
need to increase tax for those basic rate taxpayers. In fact, we can put numbers
on this. Well, I think we should. We tend to be quite pro-numbers in this
programme, on balance. And there's actually quite a cool website. It's from the
Welsh Senate, the Welsh Parliament. You can actually play around with the Welsh
tax numbers and see what happens if you raise tax rates. Oh, Nathan, with your
big beard and your interactive Welsh tax websites, I knew you were a rebel from
the moment you walked into the BBC. What can I say? I'm here to shake things up,
Tim. So, for example, if you theoretically increased the additional rate of tax,
that top rate paid by people earning over £150,000, if you increased it by 1p in
the pound, from 45 to 46p, you'd only raise an extra £8 million in revenue. And
it's a similar story for the higher rate tax band. Adding 1p in the pound only
raises £37 million. Right. And how much is the budget for the NHS in Wales?
About £10 billion a year. Which is £10,000 million. So, £8 million here and £37
million there. It's not really going to touch the sides. That's right. Any
substantial increase from income tax would have to come from increasing the
basic rate of tax. If you raised the basic rate by 1p, you'd bring in an extra
£219 million. These figures for extra revenue are best-case scenarios, assuming
people don't change their behaviour in response to the higher tax. Of course,
whether you're in Wales, England or Scotland, the same broad point applies. If
you want to raise a lot of money, you've usually got to put up the rate with the
most taxpayers. Well, thank you, Nathan. And thanks to Harry Thompson from the
Institute of Welsh Affairs for interrupting his holiday to help with this item.
Oh no, the more or less mistake siren. And here comes the editor with a piece of
paper. What have we got here? Hmm. Seems it's about last week's nurses' pay
item. In that item, we interviewed Mark Pearson of the OECD about how nurses'
pay compares with other European countries and with average pay in the UK.
Nurses in Europe, on average, earn about 20% more than their national average
wage, whereas in the UK, they get pretty much exactly the average. Now, that's
all true, but we still think it was a mistake to broadcast that claim, which we
did last Wednesday, because the OECD were comparing means. Best practice when
comparing salaries is to use the median, that's the middle value. And that's
because the mean can be, and usually is, skewed by the very high paid. According
to the Office for National Statistics, median nurses' pay in the UK is £37,000.
That's 13% above the median wage in the UK, which is £33,000. So why don't the
OECD use the median for their analysis? Well, they use the mean because that's
what countries agree to share internationally. The OECD don't have comparable
data about medians. We received an email recently from a loyal listener who'd
noticed a suspicious-looking number about how many menopausal women there are in
the UK. It's one that's reported all over the place. For example, this headline
in The Guardian. Let's talk menopause, because we are failing 13 million women.
And it's not just in the media. The number's also on an NHS England webpage
about menopause in the workplace. It is estimated that there are around 13
million people who are currently peri- or menopausal in the UK. According to the
Office for National Statistics, the female population of the UK is around 34
million. So that would mean that the menopause is affecting over a third of all
females. Josephine Casley has been looking into this. Hello, Jo. Hello. Yes, I
have been. And that figure is indeed used a lot. The NHS website does include a
reference to Wellbeing for Women. That's a charity that works on women's health.
But when I contacted them, they said that they'd never heard of this figure. But
I worked out that if you go back to the previous census from 2011 and just count
up all the female population over 45, you get a bit over 13 million. 13 million,
the same as the number. So the number does seem plausible, at least. But do all
women over 45 count as menopausal? Not really, but the definition of menopausal
actually is quite unclear. Let's start with the definition of the menopause. I
know you like your classics and it comes from ancient Greek, so maybe you can
tell me. An ancient Greek test, lovely. So, meno must be to do with the monthly
cycle, that is periods. Paus must be... Don't tell me, don't tell me. Does it
mean pause? Only a true classicist would have been able to figure that one out
correct. So it's a woman's last period. But you won't know it's your final
period until after it's happened. So I spoke to Professor Mary-Anne Lumsden to
help me understand some of these definitions. She's CEO of the International
Federation of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. It is a curious definition being
retrospective. And it is one year after the last menstrual period. And so it is
not possible to be quite certain about menopause until one year has elapsed. The
menopause then is technically a point in time rather than an interval of time.
So what's menopausal? Well, I spoke to several experts in this field and there
was a feeling that the term menopausal is vague and often ill-defined. Once
you've had the menopause, you become post-menopausal. In this phase, there might
still be health implications from having gone through the menopause. The acute
symptoms like hot flushing will usually resolve, but there will be other issues
that arise from the menopause. OK, so this number of 13 million refers to the
female population over 45, and that includes post-menopausal women. So we're
starting to count at 45. Is that a good age to start? Good question. Let's start
with the average age of the menopause. The mean age of the menopause is 51 in
the UK, US, Europe. And that means that women will go through the menopause
between the age of 45 and middle to late 50s. But before the menopause, you have
the perimenopause, which is the period leading up to the menopause. One of the
cardinal signs of the perimenopause, of course, are changes in menstrual
regularity. And these start prior to the menopause setting in, when the cycle
length often gets less, and then it begins to lengthen. And then this will
prolong, such that you get very marked irregularity in menses. Different studies
have different estimates for how long the perimenopause lasts, and it depends a
bit on how you define it. But around four to eight years seems to be average.
But symptoms such as hot flushing can go on past the menopause itself and into
the post-menopausal period. One of the big studies that's looked at this in the
US is called the SWAN study. That looked at how long women reported hot flushes
and night sweats for, and found that they occurred for an average of 7.4 years
in total. Gosh, seven and a half years. That's a long time. It is, and other
studies have found that to be lower, for example, five years. One reason that
this study came up with a higher duration of symptoms could be that they had a
diverse sample. Around a third of the women they studied were African-American.
And they found that African-American women reported the longest period of hot
flushes and night sweats, a median of 10 years. So is there any way of working
out from all of that how many women in the UK might be experiencing these sorts
of symptoms? Well, there's not a good estimate out there for this, but we can do
some rough calculations using the ONS's population estimates. If we assume that
women are perimenopausal for about four years, there could be around 1.9 million
women experiencing this. If we go for seven years of symptoms, you get around
3.3 million women. Well, either way, that's well short of 13 million. Exactly,
but this is pretty rough and all these numbers are averages. Some women
experience symptoms for much longer, even over a decade, and some women don't
have any problems at all, their periods just stop. Thank you, both to Josephine
Cassidy and also to Professor Mary-Anne Lumsden. When I finish an episode of
More or Less, I get on the train out of London, exchanging the city life of Mus
Urbanus for the rural habits of Mus Rusticus, so to speak. But last week, as I
sat contemplating sunset over the meadows, as carefree as Centinatus at his
plough, the More or Less team brought me grave news. There was unfinished
business, and reluctantly, I returned to restore order to the suddenly chaotic
world of data. That's right. Our discussion last week on the Latin roots of the
word data has thrown the More or Less audience into a frenzy. Should data be
treated as a plural or a singular word? Is it data are or data is? We had many,
many impassioned emails sent to moreorless at bbc.co.uk, so many that we felt we
simply had to revisit the topic. Here's just a little taste of our inbox over
the last week. Words are stupid, words are fun, words can put you on the run.
Has the BBC told you to change style? Don't. Why should ignorance triumph? I'm
afraid it often does. Language changes. Get over it. It hit a nerve with me,
largely because I was taught Latin by a master who obviously regretted his
choice of career. Perhaps you could think of processed data as mashed potato.
Potatoes are countable. Mashed potato isn't. Keep up the good work and stick to
your guns. The FT's should be setting a good example, not debasing our language.
I still cling to criterion and bacterium. But one listener in particular raised
a striking point. Well, it just struck me as strange that a segment on
moreorless wouldn't actually have any data on how the noun data is being used in
contemporary English. Sorry. That's Dr Beth Mallory, a corpus linguist at the
Survey of English Usage at University College London. I spoke to her to get an
expert opinion on modern trends of usage for the word data. First of all, a bit
of a grammar lesson. If we distinguish between data when it's used as a count
noun and data when it's used as a mass noun, count nouns are words like been and
fact, which have singular and plural forms. So, beans, been, fact, facts,
whereas mass nouns are words like information, energy, air, things like that.
So, Tim, you said that you think of data as a count noun. So, it's the plural of
datum. So, it would take a plural verb like are or show. But I think what made
me get in touch was that I think that for most people, data is a mass noun. So,
it's always used with a singular. So, it's like, what, like sand? You wouldn't
say sands. Well, you could say sands if you were in the middle of the poem
Ozymandias, but generally you would say sand. Exactly. So, yeah, and I think
something like energy or air would be a good analogy for it. So, that's the
grammar. What about the data? Okay, so I'm a corpus linguist. Corpus linguistics
is a methodology that uses large electronic collections of what we call
naturally occurring language data. We call them corpora. So, the singular is
corpus, the plural is corpora, which is slightly ironic, another obscure
Latinate plural for you there. We'll let it pass. And we use these corpora to
conduct empirical analyses so that we can draw conclusions about how language is
actually being used in reality. So, you've just got a massive sample of text,
probably from the internet, right? Or maybe from books, although they're merging
together these days, aren't they? Yeah, I mean, mostly. So, the kind of really
big modern corpora tend to be running into the billions. So, the really big ones
that we can use do tend to be from the web, yeah. And you can figure out how
often people say data is versus how often people say data are. I suppose I
should grit my teeth and get you to tell me. What did you find? Yeah, so, I
mean, across the different corpora that I looked at, it's around 80% data is
versus 20% data are. And that seems to be replicated across different verbs as
well. So, things like data shows versus data show. So, 80% are taking the trendy
view that the Financial Times has just taken. Yes. And 20% are stuck in the mud,
like me. Interesting. So, I did also have a look at some specialised corpora,
and data does definitely take a plural verb much more often in genres like
academia, so in research and in journalistic English. I did find some data on
this from the 1990s, and there does seem to have been a change since then. So,
the data I found said that in academic writing, it was 93% plural in the 1990s,
whereas now it seems to be more like 50-50. What does it tell us that the
academic corpora has a very different view to the web in general, if anything? I
think it tells us that this is becoming quite an elite form. So, people with a
kind of traditional classical education and an understanding of Latin are much
more likely to use the plural verb with data, and that makes it an elite form.
Speaking of the elite, of the very best, our loyal listeners have been in touch.
We have a new corpora to analyse, the More or Less Inbox. They do not see it as
normal people do. So, two-thirds of people who expressed a preference in our
inbox voted for data R, and only one-third went for data Is. Of course, this is
an unusual group, and not only is it loyal listeners, but it's loyal listeners
who felt that this was the most important thing they could do with their time.
What do you make of that? Yeah, I mean, I think there are several things going
on. So, yes, these are people who have been exercised by this segment enough to,
you know, make note that their preferred usage is the one that's declining. It's
not necessarily a representative sample of what's going on in the real world, I
don't think. Yes, I did love one listener email. Not everyone studied Latin to
know that the Romans used an A for the plural of many words, ending in om,
bacteria, strata, data, etc. It's time for etymologists to stick those
irrelevant ancient usages up their bar. That's brilliant. Our thanks to Dr Beth
Mallory from University College London, and thanks to all the Auscultadores
Fideles, that's loyal listeners of course, who sent in their ideas. And that's
all we have time for this week, but please keep those questions and comments
coming in, even if they're about numbers rather than grammar. They're all
welcome via more or less at bbc.co.uk. We will be back next week, and until
then, goodbye. There are simple ways to improve our health, but we're inundated
with often conflicting advice. So, if you were going to try just one thing to
improve your mental and physical wellbeing, what should it be? Perhaps the
martial art of Tai Chi to improve your immune system. Maybe a few nuts to slow
aging. Or how about cleaning your teeth to give your brain a boost? I'm Dr
Michael Moseley, and this is Just One Thing, where each episode we'll explore
one thing you can start doing today to improve your health or life in ways you
might not expect. Now, just a few more. Today I'm doing something that should,
in just a few minutes each day, boost my mood, my heart health, even perhaps
help me live longer. I'm lifting weights. Now, I already do some muscle building
resistance exercises like press-ups and squats. You can find out more about
those and the sort of benefits you get from doing them in our episodes on
intelligent exercises and eccentric exercises, which are both available on BBC
Sands. God, that's knackering. But I haven't tried using weights before, and I
had to borrow these from one of my sons. Woo! This is tough. For me, when I
think of weightlifting, I get this image of bodybuilders pumping huge barbells
in the gym. And that really is not my style. Right, done. Recent evidence
suggests that muscle strengthening exercises for only a few minutes a day can
confer some remarkable health benefits, boosting your immune system and even
your brain. It is counterintuitive. Just building that brawn can also build your
brain and protect your white matter. So, how about pumping some iron? I'll be
speaking to Jenny from Manchester, and I want to see if some strength training
is just one thing she'd like to try. Hi there, Jenny. Hi, Michael. Good to speak
to you. Now, what kind of exercise do you normally do? I have to be honest, the
only exercise I do is housework. So, really no exercise at all apart from day-
to-day activity. Right. Now, what I'm going to ask you to do is consider
weightlifting. Have you ever done weightlifting before? I've never done
weightlifting in my life. What does it conjure up? I'm kind of thinking big,
strong, muscly men that you see on the Olympics. Yeah, not something I would
think of for me. Okay. So, what I want you to do is some weight training, and
you can do it without special equipment, just using your own body weight or
things you probably already have around in the house. So, I want you to do a
combination of things. So, one is called the bicep curl, but you're going to be
holding a big bottle of milk. And then I want you to do some calf raises. That's
where you hold on to a countertop and you lift yourself up onto your tiptoes.
And then finally, and this is probably the most challenging, I want you to do
something called weighted squats. What you need here is you get a rucksack or a
backpack and you put some books in it, and then you do some squats. And I want
you to do three sets of these, ten each, and this is going to take, you know,
maybe ten, maybe 15 minutes a day. So, a bit challenging, but are you up for it?
Yeah, I'm definitely up for it. I've asked Jenny to do a few minutes of simple
strength training exercises every day for the next week, and we'll see how she
gets on. But if you'd like to do something similar, do check with your GP if
you're starting a new exercise regime or have any previous injuries. That said,
there are lots of benefits of incorporating a bit of strength training into your
life. Apart from making you look more toned, building your muscles could help
you live longer. An American study found that muscle mass is one of the
strongest predictors of longevity, even more than weight or body mass index.
Researchers followed 3,600 men and women over the age of 50 for a decade. They
found that those who had more muscle mass were at a lower risk of death from all
causes. Lifting weights can also benefit your metabolism, your waistline, and
even your blood sugars. That's partly because building muscle increases your
insulin sensitivity, improving your ability to lower your blood sugar levels
after a meal. It can even enhance your immunity. One study looked at part of the
immune system's first line of defence, cells that surround and engulf pathogens
called neutrophils. When researchers compared women who were sedentary with
those who regularly did resistance training, the latter had far more active
neutrophils. Strength training may even reverse ageing at a cellular level. In
one small but fascinating study, scientists asked 14 older people to do strength
training twice a week for six months, and then compared their muscles to that of
younger adults. They looked at the parts of the muscle cells that generate
energy, the mitochondria. Now, normally these wane with age, but the older
adults who had been doing strength training boosted their mitochondrial function
to levels similar to those seen in younger men and women. And finally, strength
training can do good things for your brain power. I'll be talking to an expert
shortly to find out how and why building your brawn can boost your brain. But
first, let's see how Jenny is getting on. I'm on day four and finding it really
helpful. I've been able to do the bicep curls just while I've been watching the
TV or got a couple of minutes spare. Because you don't need any special
equipment, I don't need to go anywhere. I don't need to get changed. It's also
been easier to fit it into a really busy schedule than I'd expected. And I am
optimistic about completing the task. We'll catch up with Jenny at the end of
the week. But now to get the lowdown on resistance training, I'm speaking to Dr.
Teresa Lou Ambrose, who is professor of physical therapy at the University of
British Columbia in Canada. Hello, Dr. Lou Ambrose. Hello. So what are the
benefits of strength training? It's most widely known benefits include the
maintenance of your muscle mass as well as your muscle strength and your bone
health. And these are actually really important benefits as we age. And by
maintaining muscle mass, you can also reduce your risk of chronic conditions
such as type 2 diabetes and heart conditions. And these chronic conditions
actually do increase your risk for developing cognitive impairment and dementia.
And so this kind of segues to the benefits of strength training for brain health
in terms of our cognitive performance. So it's been shown that it can improve
your memory as well as your more complex cognitive abilities such as decision
making. And it appears that strength training can also directly impact both your
brain function and brain structure. OK, that is surprising to most people, I
would imagine, that pumping iron is good for your brain. Can you tell me about
your research? So we did two studies. In one study, they were otherwise healthy
older adults, so age 65 and older. And in another study, we included individuals
who were also 65 years and older but had pre-existing cognitive impairment. And
in both studies, we found that strength training had benefits for both the
cognitive function as well as metrics acquired on neuroimaging. When you talk
about improvements in cognitive function, what sort of things did you see with
this group? What we found is that with strength training, people were able to
remember things better and specifically what we call associative memory, such
that today is the first time I've met you, I've seen your face, I know your
name. My capacity to associate your name with your face in the future is called
an associative memory capacity. And what we found is that with strength
training, this particular aspect of memory improves. We also found that with
strength training, people had better executive functions, meaning that they were
able to make the appropriate decision based on the circumstance presented to
them. Right. So in this case, doing these resistance exercises not only meant
that you could remember other people's names, who you'd met before better as a
form of memory test, but also that they made better decisions in everyday life
in a way. Yes. And did they stick with it? Actually, yes. For one of the studies
that was for 12 months, so we did train them for 12 months, but then we also
followed them up for another 12 months. And during that follow-up, we didn't
offer exercise classes, but more just to monitor how they were doing. And so
what we did find is that a year after the study, they were more active than when
they first started the study, and as well, some of the cognitive benefits were
retained, which is great news. What do you think is the mechanism? Why do you
think people who do these strength exercises, it improves their brain function?
First, I want to acknowledge, I think there's multiple pathways by which
exercise brings about benefits for cognitive and brain health. But certainly one
of the main mechanisms there's evidence for is the release of what we call
neurotrophic factors. And they're kind of like peptides that essentially promote
the growth of new neurons, the survival of neurons, as well as the
differentiation of neurons themselves. There's two major types. There is a
brain-derived neurotrophic factors, as well as insulin growth factor one. But I
think what's really come to light in the last five years is the role of mild
kinds. It's a fairly new discovery, and they're essentially specialized hormones
that are actually produced in muscles and are released when muscles contract.
Current evidence suggests once they're released, they basically travel
throughout the body and go to different organs and tissues and jumpstart a
variety of biochemical processes. But in terms of the brain, what has been shown
is that when you do engage in exercise, there's particular mild kinds such as
the cathisbin B that actually is released within the muscle, but crosses the
blood-brain barrier and enhances neurotrophic factor production such as BDNF.
OK, so it all ties in. Essentially, you do a workout. As you do that, these mild
kinds are released. They go into the brain, and then they encourage the brain to
produce BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, which as I understand it is
like a sort of fertilizer for the brain. It helps preserve brain cells.
Absolutely. And I think it's a real shift in how we think about how exercise
impacts the brain as well. Traditionally, we've been very focused on what's
released in the brain, and we haven't really focused on peripheral mechanisms.
So I think the muscle-brain crosstalk really kind of enriches our understanding
of how exercise brings about benefits, and again, the role of muscles. I do find
it fascinating that we're still learning so much about how our muscles interact
with our brains. Let's check in with Jenny one more time and find out if
strength training is something she'll carry on with. I have really surprised
myself. I never imagined doing weights, but actually it's been fantastic. I
definitely have noticed improvements in that I feel that my posture is better. I
feel physically better. I feel mentally better. And over the last few days,
people have told me I'm looking better and I'm definitely going to carry on. I'm
really glad to hear Jenny has enjoyed her weightlifting week, and I've been
doing it all week as well. In fact, I'm doing it right now. Because I'm not a
complete beginner, I'm actually doing it to failure, which means until I can't
do it any longer. I think I'm reaching that point now. OK, other arm. I think I
can feel my forearm and grip getting stronger. So I do think that lifting
weights is worth it because it simply has so many benefits, from the obvious,
like getting stronger, to the surprising, like enhancing your brain power. So
there you are. Lift some weights and you could get some big benefits, stronger
muscles and bones, a healthy heart and immune system, and it could even help you
live longer. Right, enough. So that's it. It's just one thing you can
incorporate into your daily routine, which really could benefit your body and
life. If you want to hear more of the series, why not subscribe on BBC Sounds.
And next week at the same time here in Radio 4, Michael goes nuts. He discovers
how eating nuts can give your brain a boost, reduce your waistline, and may even
slow down your body's ageing process. The Daily Service is starting shortly over
on Radio 4, 198 Longwave and DAB Digital Radio. It's led today by Father Frankie
Mulgrew. John Donne is losing his faith in our Book of the Week coming up on
Radio 4 FM in just a moment. First, though, a very important question from James
Nochte. Nearly a year on, how can peace be restored in Europe? This will end
when there is enough progress on the battlefield by Ukraine. A war that has to
be won or a broken peace. This is James Nochte, and in Europe and the United
States, I've been talking to negotiators about the lessons from the past. You've
had a 70-year armistice in Korea, but what you've not had is 70 years of a
quiet, calm border. Every war is different, so how might understanding old
conflict help Ukraine, where both sides speak of nothing but victory? How Wars
End, on BBC Radio 4, available now on BBC Sounds. Now, time for Catherine
Rundell's new biography of the Renaissance poet John Donne. Today, The Loss of
His Brother Henry and The Loss of His Faith. Super Infinite is read by Blake
Ritson. Donne's pleasure in Lincoln's Inn, in teasing his fellow students, in
testing the scope of his linguistic virtuosity, lasted roughly a year. It was
shattered by a double bill of disaster, by persecution and by plague. In 1593,
cases of plague began to grow exponentially. The theatres were closed, the bear
baiting was forced to shut, the brothels emptied. In the streets, officials
wielded three-foot-long martial wands to swat at people who weren't maintaining
social distancing. William Shakespeare, who across the river was just beginning
to make his name as a playwright, found his livelihood temporarily overturned,
swiftly switched to poetry and wrote Venus and Adonis, an epic which abruptly
made him famous at court. Donne wrote a lament for the city's swagger. Now
pleasures dearth our city doth possess, Our theatres are filled with emptiness,
As lank and thin as every street and way, As a woman delivered yesterday. Donne
had been at Lincoln's Inn for a year when his brother Henry was arrested. Henry
was John's junior by a year and had followed him after Oxford to Thavy's Inn,
close by Lincoln's Inn. In the spring of 1593, Henry took a young priest called
William Harrington into his chambers. He planned to hide him from Elizabeth's
priest-hunters and feed him and care for him in secret. He was still barely more
than a child, or he would have seen the impossibility of it. Henry's fellow
scholars would have been all around, eating and working and gossiping. How did
he expect to get food to him? How did he expect to wash Harrington's clothes, to
dispose of his waste, to keep friends away? In May, without warning, Henry's
chambers were raided. A man called Richard Young hunted through his rooms and
found Harrington inside. Both William and Henry were arrested, but Harrington,
trained to withstand pain, at first steadfastly denied being involved in the
Catholic Church. Henry betrayed him. He broke under questioning and admitted
that Harrington had said he was a priest and did shrive him. To shrive is to
listen to confession. Henry and Harrington were sent first to the Clink prison
and then to Newgate. Newgate jail, rebuilt in 1423, was notorious for its dirt
and cruelty. By the time Henry was sent there, it was a grotesque place, cold
and dark and humiliating. Corruption and bribery were accepted as the norm.
Prisoners were kept in leg-irons and forced to pay for their own board. The
floor was said to crunch because of the carpet of lice, dead and alive. It was
from Newgate that Harrington was tried and found guilty of high treason on 18
February 1594. He was subjected to the death of a traitor. It was reported that
he was drawn from Newgate to Tyburn and there hanged, cut down alive, struggled
with the hangman, but was bowled and quartered. Henry never saw his friend leave
Newgate for the scaffold. The plague was running untrammelled through the cells.
Dunn did not visit his brother in jail. He delayed a few days. Perhaps he was
afraid of the plague or perhaps there was nobody who could tell him there was an
urgency. He may not have known what was happening to the boy with whom he had
gone, small and alone, to face the older, taller undergraduates of Oxford.
Within days of arriving in Newgate, Henry was feverish, tortured by buboes. He
died fast. He was nineteen years old. Dunn barely wrote about his brother's
death in the letters that we have, but fever and corruption and plague got into
his writing. Often ill in later life, Dunn was handsome but not strong. Henry's
death must have made it more terrifying. To have lost his brother to plague
would have made every one of Dunn's own itches or coughs a terror. Later in
life, Dunn repeatedly fell ill with what's now thought to have been relapsing
fever, a tick-borne infection. The symptoms were exactly those of the early
stages of plague. Each time he felt it rise in him, there would have been the
question, was it the old familiar fever, or had Henry's contagion come for him?
There's a kind of imaginative ferocity to Dunn's writing about death after
Henry, and it grows over time as he loses more and more of the people he loves,
and their ghosts pile up around him. He becomes a peddler of the grotesque, a
forensic scholar of the entropy of the body. The word decay appears a dozen
times in his verse, and that old Norse word, rot, is scattered through his work.
Of an imagined love rival, he writes, In early and long scarceness may he rot.
In an elegy, he demands of us, Think that thy body rots. He wrote of death, Now
wantonly he spoils and eats us not, But breaks off friends and lets us piecemeal
rot. Between Thomas More's execution in 1535 and Henry's death in 1593, we can
count eleven members of Dunn's family who died in exile or in prison for their
Catholicism. There was some majesty and glory, as with Thomas More, who ended by
being canonised by the Catholic Church, but also plenty of humiliation and muddy
uncertainties. Exactly when Dunn turned from Catholicism to Protestantism is the
central boxing ring of Dunn's studies, how, when and why the young man decided
to turn away from the rituals and well-loved rites of his childhood. In 1593, at
Henry's death, Dunn was still Catholic, and when he married, he was not. What
happened in between? Is it possible that he licked a finger and held it to the
political wind and saw that no man could advance while remaining a Catholic?
It's possible there was never a change of heart, only of expedience, but if the
conversion was real, there was probably no single burst of light or dark that
caused it. Like almost everything in our rusty, hinged, slow-moving world, it
happened in pieces. There was the power of his ambition, and his understanding
that promotion and success would not be compatible with open Catholicism. But
there would also have been new books and new conversations, drinking with
Protestants, flirtations with Protestants. There would have been the pull of
other allegiances over denominational ones, to the monarch, and to the idea of
nationhood, which slowly took on the shape of national loyalism and led him
towards the Church of England. His priorities shifted, realigned, took on new
shapes. You, too, have experienced time. And what happened to Henry must have
been part of it. Dunne wrote nothing that explicitly names his brother, in part
because he wrote very little about any of his family. There are far more of his
words to be found about eagles, dust, the suburb of Mitcham and Tacks, than his
own mother. But he did write, Grief which did drown me and half quenched by it
are satric fires which urged me to have writ in scorn of all. In that lack of
naming you could hear the guilt that must have haunted him. He would have known
that Henry was sheltering Harrington. It's been suggested Dunne may even have
helped shelter the man himself, although there's no evidence for it except the
bond of closeness between the two brothers. The loss shaped him. It seemed to
clarify his sense of the necessity of seizing control of your own self and own
fate. He told a friend in a verse letter in the 1590s, Be thine own home and in
thyself dwell. Henry was dead, and the delight of London was dead, too. By 1596
Dunne was keen to get away. He was finished with the law and with the life he
had led. Untrained and inexperienced though he was, Dunne joined a naval
expedition against Spain. In early June they set out, dressed in their finest
clothes, silver and lace gleaming, cheered by crowds. Their weapons shone, and
they were some of the best-equipped men to have departed England's docks for
many years. The first portion of the expedition was an admiral's dream. After
just over two weeks the English sailed in sight of Cadiz, where they launched a
cannon attack on the Spanish ships in harbour. It was a great success, but the
kind of success that was terrible to watch. Dunne wrote in his epigram, Nave
Arsa, a burnt ship. Out of a fired ship which by no way but drowning could be
rescued from the flame, some men leaped forth and ever as they came near the
foe's ships did by their shot decay. So all were lost which in the ship were
found, they in the sea being burnt, they in the burnt ship drowned. In 1597 he
took part in a second unsuccessful expedition with Walter Raleigh, which
immediately ran into a violent storm. Dunne wrote that it rained more than if
the sun had drunk the sea before, and some coffined in their cabins lie, equally
grieved that they are not dead and yet must die. In chaos they made it back to
shore. Slowly the ships were repaired, the sailors loitered about in the port
waiting to begin again, though some thought better of it, found horses and
galloped home. Dunne was tougher than the boys who went riding home for warm
fires and clean clothes, but he was underlighted by the way the days were going.
In late August the fleet prepared to set out again for Spain, but the crew was
depleted, dirty and sick. The rest of the expedition was chaotic, the ships
communicated largely by musket fire, and it's difficult to be specific with a
musket. The Spanish fleet evaded the English. The English could find no viable
way to attack it. They seized a few straggling ships but failed to take several
larger ones. They returned home, rocking and tipping through huge waves, to a
royal reception as stormy as the weather. Nobody gathered at the dock to cheer.
Sailors had foot-rot and suppurating wounds. Dunne did not attempt the
privateering life again. Perhaps, though, voyaging had got into his blood, or
perhaps it was always there. His poetry after his sally on the sea is shot
through with images of exploration, discovery, fresh territory. Oh, my America,
my new-found land! New-found lands were at the forefront of the Renaissance
mind, that and maps of lands. The first accurate map of England and Wales,
Christopher Saxton's Atlas of 1579, became a kind of talisman. Dunne would have
seen it. Years later, near the end of his life, he would imagine himself a
paper-thin chart. Whilst my physicians by their love are grown cosmographers,
and I their map who lie flat on this bed. And just as West and East, when the
map is folded, meet and touch, and become the same, so West, Death, becomes the
East, Rebirth. As West and East in all flat maps, and I am one, are one, so
Death doth touch the Resurrection. Before that, though, before he knew about
pain and fever, there was the thrill of exploration. Dunne's verse insists over
and over that we approach another body with the same awe with which we would
step onto unknown earth. In the Good Morrow, from around 1602, he wrote it out,
step by step instructions. Let sea discoverers to new worlds have gone. Let maps
to others worlds on worlds have shown. Let us possess one world, each hath one,
and is one. The master of satire, David Sedaris, is back with his unique blend
of wit and wisdom. I know that people are now taking pictures of themselves at
funerals, because when I looked up selfies at funerals, was the third option.
The humorous laughs at life and himself. I've been studying Japanese, and I'll
say something to Hugh, I'll say, oh, did you know that this is how you say, and
he says, we're only going for four days. A new series of Meet David Sedaris
starts tomorrow evening at 6.30pm.