TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-20-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on 92 to 95 FM, on 198 Longwave, on Digital and on BBC Sounds. This is BBC
Radio 4. It's 10 o'clock, good evening. This is The World Tonight with Rithal
Asha. President Biden pledges his unwavering support for Ukraine in its fight
against Russia in a surprise trip to Kiev. We report from the front line in
eastern Ukraine about the cost of the conflict. We're in the corridor of a busy
hospital. Seeing the steady stream of casualties being brought in here, you get
a sense of what this fight is costing Ukraine. Police in Lancashire say they've
formally identified the body they found in the river wire as Nicola Bully. Her
family have criticised parts of the media. They again have taken it upon
themselves to run stories and increase their own profits. Do the press and other
media channels and so-called professionals not know when to stop. We discuss the
relationship between the press and the police. Scotland's finance minister
throws her hat in the ring to be the next leader of the SNP. Kate Forbes is open
about her religious beliefs. I am a practising Christian. I practise the
teachings of most mainstream religions, whether that's Islam, Judaism,
Christianity, that marriage is between a man and a woman. What should be the
place of religion in politics? That's all after the BBC News read tonight by
Charles Carroll. President Biden has promised that the United States will stand
with Ukraine for as long as it takes during an unannounced trip to Kiev. At a
joint news conference with President Zelensky, Mr Biden pledged to provide
further military support and to implement further sanctions on Russia. From
Kiev, here's our correspondent James Mortarhouse. A little over a year ago, few
thought Kiev would last beyond a couple of days after Russia launched its full-
scale invasion. It's why the site of the world's most powerful politician, at
the heart of a country, still at war, is so significant. In a reminder that this
conflict truly began far before February last year, Joe Biden and Volodymy
Zelensky visited a memorial to soldiers who died during this nine-year war.
Another $500 million military package was also announced. While this has been
welcomed, Kiev is hoping to shorten the time delay between Western aid being
promised and used. More than 30 countries, including the UK, the United States,
Germany and France, have said that a ban on Russian and Belarusian athletes
competing in international sporting events should remain in place. They were
responding to efforts by the International Olympic Committee to allow these
athletes to compete at the Paris Olympics as neutrals. Ukraine says it will lead
a boycott of the event if that happens. Lancashire police have confirmed that
the body found in the river wire yesterday was Nicola Bully. The 45-year-old
mother of two disappeared while walking her dog at the end of last month. Her
family said she had been the light of their world. They also hit out at the
media and members of the public, who they accused of vilifying them, as our
correspondent in Preston Nick Garnett explains. The family has said that they
are furious with two news organisations, Sky News and ITV, for making contact
directly with the family when they specifically asked for privacy. They again,
they said, have taken it upon themselves to run stories about the family to sell
papers and increase their own profiles. It is shameful they have acted in this
way and they said very straightforwardly, leave us alone. That was directed
mostly at the traditional media but also at social media networks as well.
Junior doctors in England are to go on a three-day strike next month after
voting overwhelmingly for industrial action. The main union, the British Medical
Association, said that almost every doctor who cast a ballot voted yes. The
health secretary, Steve Barclay, said the announcement was deeply disappointing.
Our health correspondent, Sophie Hutchinson, reports. This is a significant
escalation in the industrial action in the NHS. These junior doctors include the
bulk of medics ranking below consultant level. Of the 47,000 who were balloted
by the British Medical Association, the vast majority agreed to strike. The
three-day walkout, the longest single strike in their history, is likely to hit
the already beleaguered NHS hard, heaping pressure on the government. The junior
doctors are calling for above-inflation pay increases but the government has
said pay in line with inflation is unaffordable and that the action will mean
more cancelled appointments for patients. Scotland's Finance Secretary, Kate
Forbes, has told the BBC she wouldn't have voted for her government's gender
reform bill in its current form. She was speaking after announcing her bid to
take over the SNP leadership from Nicola Sturgeon, joining the health secretary,
Mr Forbes said she had significant concerns about gender self-identification.
Officials in southern Turkey say at least three people have died and around 200
others are injured after an earthquake with a magnitude of 6.4 struck the
region. People are reported to be trapped under the rubble. The area was amongst
the hardest hit by the quake on February 6th, which caused the deaths of more
than 46,000 people in Turkey and in Syria. Our correspondent Laura Bicker is in
Hatai. There is fear, some panic and the small aftershocks keep coming. Lines of
ambulances and rescue crews are trying to get to some of the worst affected
areas where the walls of badly damaged buildings have collapsed. A number of
structures that were left standing after the tremor on February 6th have now
crumbled, including a bridge. The Hatai mayor has said that there are people
trapped under the rubble. Many cracks and roads have become deep scars, making
it more difficult for the emergency services to get where they may be needed. A
group of Conservative Anglican church leaders from around the world have said
they no longer recognise the Archbishop of Canterbury Justin Welby as the head
of the global Anglican communion. It follows the Church of England's decision to
allow blessings for same-sex couples. The 12 leaders accuse the church of going
against historical biblical faith. Supermarkets are facing a shortage of
tomatoes, with shoppers across the UK unable to find them on the shelves. The
issues have been caused by poor weather in Europe and North Africa. Unusually
cold conditions in Morocco delayed the tomatoes ripening before bad weather
stopped ferries and glories crossing to Europe. Here's our business
correspondent Theo Liggett. Pictures of empty shelves in supermarkets and
complaints about shortages of some products, especially tomatoes, have been
circulating on social media for several days. Now the British Retail Consortium
has admitted that harvests have been affected by what it calls difficult weather
conditions. During the winter months, a large proportion of the produce we
consume is grown in southern Spain and Morocco. Both regions have been affected
by poor weather in recent weeks, including storms and a cold snap. This has
affected crop yields and growing times, making it more difficult for wholesalers
and retailers to get hold of the supplies they need. Along with tomatoes,
cucumbers and peppers are understood to be in short supply. The BRC says
supermarkets are working with farmers to ensure customers are able to access a
wide range of fresh produce. And Professor Dame Angela MacLean has been
appointed as the Government's new Chief Scientific Advisor. She'll be the first
woman to hold the role and will take up the post in April. She was a member of
the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, known as SAGE, during the
pandemic, and she was deputy to the current holder of the role, Sir Patrick
Valance. Thank you Charles for your listening to The World Tonight with Ritala
Shah. Secrecy, symbolism and air raid sirens, all a feature of Joe Biden's trip
to Kiev today. The President took a 10-hour train ride from Poland to reach the
Ukrainian capital in a visit which the White House said was intended to reaffirm
America's unwavering commitment to Ukraine's democracy, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. That's a message which won't have been lost on Moscow,
and as Joe Biden and Vladimir Zelensky were in St Michael's Cathedral in Central
Kiev, air raid sirens could be heard. Not unusual, but a reminder of the
proximity and intensity of the war. As the first anniversary of the invasion of
Ukraine approaches, Russian forces are stepping up their assault on the eastern
city of Bakhmut. They've been trying to capture it for more than six months now,
and Vladimir Putin appears to be pushing for a victory before Friday the 24th.
President Zelensky said the defence of the city would continue but not at any
price. Our senior international correspondent Ola Gurin reports now from the
outskirts of Bakhmut. The battle for Bakhmut is now at close quarters, inside
the city and on the outskirts. Ukrainian troops are still defending every inch.
But the enemy is closing in. It's hellish, according to President Zelensky, who
says Bakhmut must be defended, but not at any cost. The snow is coming down now.
We're at a concealed position on the outskirts of Bakhmut, just hearing some
more shelling there. We're with troops from the 28th Brigade. They're part of
the defence of the city and Bakhmut is still in Ukrainian hands. The Russians
have been stepping up their attacks. They have gained some ground. But the
mortar team we are with are fighting on, targeting enemy positions two
kilometres away. I'm with Victor, one of the troops here. He ran a shoe business
before the war. He has a wife and two children, one of them a baby, just 18
months old. And he hasn't seen them since the war began. He's been fighting
since the very start. And are you worried the baby doesn't remember you? Yes, he
doesn't remember me. When I went to the war, he was so little. He didn't
understand about when I speak in the fibre to tell the story. He didn't know who
I am. We want the war finished yesterday. When will be it we don't know. We're
in the corridor of a busy hospital. We can't say where. And military casualties
are being brought in. In the space of just a few minutes we saw three ambulances
arriving outside. There were two heavily wounded soldiers, both stretcher cases
carried out with drips in their arms. And there were two walking wounded. The
floor is covered in mud. There's been so much traffic. So many boots coming from
the battlefield. Doctor, could I ask you first of all, are you happy to tell me
your name? My name is Mirozlov. It's almost a year now since the invasion
happened and Ukraine came under attack. Did you ever think the fighting would
still be like this a year on? I thought it would last a long time, he says,
because the country we are fighting wants to destroy us, using all its strength.
And that country doesn't have any way back. I've just come along the corridor
here, there are one, two, three, four wounded men on stretchers. They're covered
in foil blankets to keep them warm and to protect against shock. Seeing the
steady stream of casualties being brought in here, you get a sense of what this
fight is costing Ukraine, of the price this country is paying to defend its
territory. All Aghiran reporting from Bakhmut. Yuri Sax, an advisor to Ukraine's
Ministry for Defence, I asked him about the battle for Bakhmut and reports that
Russia would claim the city in the coming days. In the east we have seen in the
past for the last two years, the war between Ukraine and Ukraine. And the war
between Ukraine and Ukraine. In the east we have seen in the past four to six
weeks, there was a build up of troops, there was a build up of military
equipment. So this could be construed, I suppose, as intensification of Russia's
offensive. Whether it can be called that offensive, which everybody was talking
about. Our understanding is and our approach is maximizing the losses of our
enemy while keeping our losses at a minimum. This gives us time, first of all,
to prepare for our counter offensive. What would be the symbolism of losing a
town like Bakhmut? We call it the fortress of Bakhmut, but Bakhmut is Ukraine.
We are fighting a smart war. We are not prepared to use our soldiers as cannon
fodder as the Russians do. We keep on preparing for our counter offensive and we
hold up the enemy for as much as we can where the enemy is trying to carry out
the attacks. President Biden was in Kiev today. How important was this visit? It
is hugely important because it sends the right signal to Ukrainians that our
allies are with us, they will stand with us until victory and it sends the same
message with a different connotation to the enemy. Has the US been a better ally
than your European neighbors? I think the correct way would be to say that
they've been a leader on many occasions. They were the first to send Ukraine the
multi-launch rocket systems, for example. But the Tank Coalition, the UK was the
first country to actually say that the tanks will arrive in Ukraine. The
challenge is two tanks. By and large, of course, the US by sheer weight on the
international arena is showing leadership on many occasions, but European
countries are a very powerful ally as well. China's top diplomat Wang Yi is in
Moscow today. We heard the US Secretary of State Antony Blinken suggesting that
China is considering giving lethal support to Russia, in other words, more
weapons. How concerned are you? It would be not a very good development if that
was to happen. We don't have that information confirmed yet, and we will have to
wait and see. And of course, we will continue to speak through our diplomatic
channels to our counterparties in China, with the leader convincing them, and
I'm sure that our allies will do the same. So our president was very clear when
he said that this would not be the right decision by China in these
circumstances. Why do you think Antony Blinken would have made that public? I'm
sure he had his own reasons and his own data that he relies on, but as far as we
are concerned, we will just continue to advocate for other countries not to
provide Russia with lethal work, because we have seen what happened when, for
example, Iran began supplying Russia with these drones, which are used to
destroy Ukrainian electricity infrastructure, to destroy cities and houses and
kill people. Just finally, I remember speaking to you and many others in the
run-up to the war. Nobody could quite believe that this would happen, that
Russia would invade. The war's gone on for a year. Will there be a second
anniversary? I surely hope that this is the first and the last anniversary for
us and for the whole world, and the most important thing is that we are
confident that it can be the last. We are confident that if we all step up our
efforts in terms of military support provision and all other aspects of
defeating Russia economically by sanctions and everything, this is what our
president said today, that we hope that this year will be the year of our
victory, of our joint victory. It is in nobody's interest to prolong this war,
to turn it into a frozen war. That's Yuri Sak, an adviser to Ukraine's Ministry
for Defence. Lancashire police have confirmed a body found in the river wire on
Sunday is the missing mother of two, Nicola Bully. The 45-year-old disappeared
during a riverside dog walk in St Michael's on wire more than three weeks ago,
sparking a major search operation. In a statement read out by the police, Miss
Bully's family played tribute to the one who made our lives so special. The
family also questioned the role of some sections of media during the
investigation. Our girls will get the support they need from the people who love
them the most. And it saddens us to think that one day we will have to explain
to them that the press and members of the public accuse their dad of wrongdoing,
misquoted and vilified friends and family. This is absolutely appalling. They
have to be held accountable. This cannot happen to another family. We tried last
night to take in what we have been told in the day, only to have Sky News and
ITV making contact with us directly when we expressly asked for privacy. Do the
press and other media channels and so-called professionals not know when to
stop. That's that statement read out by the police from Nicola Bully's family.
Danny Shaw was the BBC's Home Affairs correspondent and he has many years of
experience of covering crime and missing person stories. Danny, there's been a
lot of discussion about the activity of people on social media, criticism of the
police for how they manage the comms in this case. But this was a criticism of
traditional media, of responsible media. What do you think has happened here? I
don't know exactly what's happened with Sky and ITV making direct contact with
the family, but I know that in that sort of situation when the family have had
the worst possible news that a body has been found, you have to approach
something like that with the utmost sensitivity. And normally if you've got a
request for a statement or comment in those circumstances, it would have to go
through official channels and that would be through the police and then the
police might relay that through a family liaison officer to the family
concerned. It's possible if direct contact is made, that's because journalists
on the ground had a relationship with the family previously, but really you've
got to really take a step back and think whether or not the family want any kind
of contact given particularly that when the statement from the police came
yesterday they said that the family wanted privacy. Neither Sky nor ITV are
commenting right now, but in a situation like this, obviously if it's a missing
person, there is a need sometimes often for the police to publicise that, to get
as many people to come forward who might be helpful to the inquiry. There is a
difficult balance in all of this, isn't there? There's a balance obviously the
police need the media to publicise appeals and they have done that during this
inquiry. I think what the police don't understand and I speak to many police
officers around the country of different forces, they don't quite understand
that it's not something where the media just take a police press release and put
it out there, they're not just doing the publicity on behalf of the police. The
media also have a legitimate role in asking the police questions about an
inquiry. They might want to speak to the senior investigating officer, they
might want to speak to the person that's leading the search teams. I don't think
the police quite understand that there is a bit of a transaction, that there has
to be a bit of compromise on both sides and it seems in this particular case
that the relationship between the press and the police is completely broken down
at quite an early stage. But once again it's as if we're turning the attention
back onto the police whereas this criticism was very much of the media. Are
there rules? Levison 2 was supposed to happen, it was supposed to look into the
conduct of the press, relations with the police, never happened. Are there other
rules? There are clear rules for broadcasters, there's the Ofcom code and it's
possible that Sky and ITV, that there's a potential breach of the Ofcom code in
terms of respect of privacy. And there are codes for newspapers as well, there's
codes for the BBC. In terms of social media that's much more challenging because
how can you stop these TikTok detectives, these amateur sleuths from sort of
descending on the area, coming up with conspiracy theories. That's something
that's very difficult to police and some of that behaviour has been absolutely
disgusting. Danny Shaw, thanks very much. Paid for five days but actually
working for four. That's the principle behind a pilot of a four-day working week
and squeezing courts into pint pots appears to have been a success. More than 60
companies around the UK began the six-month trial and almost all of them have
decided to continue with this way of working with no loss of pay for their
employees. Joe Ryle is director of the four-day a week pilot and Claire Daniels
is CEO of Trio Media, one of the firms that took part. Good evening to you both.
Claire Daniels, why did you decide to take part in this and how did you change
the way you work? Hi, good evening. For us, it was very much around
productivity, looking at ways that we could be more productive as a business and
just being totally open minded to what that might look like. I think the biggest
thing is that mentality change in changing the way you work and having a mindset
shift of actually the five-day working week model is outdated and people aren't
productive for the full time during that time. So when you look at that and you
look at how long at work people are productive versus how long they might be
distracted by personal affairs or things like that, you start resetting the
balance and changing your mindset and going, well, let's have four really
focused work days and give people a much better work-life balance. So you're
doing away with the jacket on the back of a chair with nobody in sight, but how
are you measuring success? How do you know this is working? Well, for us, one of
the key measures for success was financial performance because for any business
owner, that's what it comes down to. And whilst we were on the trial, we
performed 33% better than the six months prior and 47% better than the year
before. So it seems to me that actually, you know, giving people a better work-
life balance meant they were happier employees and they performed better. Jo
Royal, that is extraordinary. Clearly, there is some sort of improvement there.
But does it suggest that actually before, productivity was actually just quite
poor in these firms? Well, I'm in the high, by the way. We have an acute problem
in the UK where we worked on the longest hours in the world, longest hours in
Europe, except for Greece, while having won the least productive economies. So
all these long working hours we're putting in aren't actually producing good
results at work. And so what this trial has shown is that, you know, across a
wide variety of sectors of the economy, four-day week is a win-win for both
workers and employers and it will improve productivity. And so, you know, we're
really pleased with the results. It's a major breakthrough for the movement
towards a four-day working week. We're looking forward to the report being
published tomorrow. But hang on, it might work for some people in some sectors,
but what about, I don't know, if you work in hospitality or if you're a lawyer
or an accountant or someone who has to put in billable hours, how would it
affect you? You're not going to be able to work, you know, the same number of
hours in four days, are you? Well, it's not going to be an immediate change
overnight for everyone. There's going to be a, have to be a transition to get
there. We say we want to see the four-day week be the normal way of working by
the end of this decade. But what this pilot has shown, and this is probably the
most exciting bit, is that a wide variety of sectors, we had hospitality
companies, retail, manufacturing, construction, and they've all done it in their
own way, but they've all managed to reduce hours by 80% while maintaining pay.
And, you know, nearly every company that took part is continuing with the four-
day week at the end of this pilot. And I think that's really telling. Claire
Daniels, what did you do? Did you sort of shut up shop for a day or did you
stagger people's working week? Yeah, we staggered. So it was really important to
stay a five-day week company and we said we split the team in half. So half of
them do Monday to Thursday and half do Tuesday to Friday. And were people
resistant? Were they open to this as an experiment? There was a real mix. I
think the expectation is that everyone will just jump at the chance. But
equally, you know, we had habitual over-workers who were concerned about how
their performance would be judged if they couldn't get all the work done in four
days. So there was definitely a lot of work to be done in terms of people's
mindset and giving them the tools and resources they needed to be able to make
it a success. You, I think, have 13 employees. Do you think that made it easier
to do something like this? Because, I mean, essentially, you could all sit down
and kind of thrash it out, couldn't you? Yeah. I mean, I can't comment on what
the difference might be to rolling it out in a larger organisation. But it was
definitely useful that I did take the whole team along on the journey with me
and, you know, could speak to everyone face-to-face to ease any concerns and
make sure that, yeah, people had what they needed. And what would you say to
anyone who's listening, thinking, oh, that would never work? What would be your
one bit of really sort of key advice? It would be, do you think you're getting
the most productivity out of your people as it currently is today? You know, I
just think there needs to be a change in mindset. Claire Daniels, Jo Ryle, I
imagine there'll be lots of people going into work tomorrow demanding change.
Thank you both very much. Three members of the SNP have now declared they're
standing to replace Nicholas Durgen as party leader. Health Secretary Hamza
Yousuf and Finance Secretary Kate Forbes and the former Community Safety
Minister Ash Regan have all begun to set out their stalls and will be lobbying
to win backing from high profile party figures in an effort to win the votes of
the wider membership. And while you might expect much of the debate to focus on
how to push the party's core agenda of independence or perhaps on public
services, it's striking that the religious beliefs of two of the candidates have
already come under scrutiny. Kate Forbes is a member of the Free Church of
Scotland which takes a Conservative position on women's reproductive rights and
same sex marriage. In an interview with the BBC today, she made her stance
clear. I am a practising Christian. I practise the teachings of most mainstream
religions, whether that's Islam, Judaism, Christianity, that marriage is between
a man and a woman. But that's what I practise. As a servant of democracy in a
country where this is law, I would defend to the hilt, you're right and anybody
else's right to live and to love without harassment or fear. The Health
Secretary Hamza Yousuf was asked about whether he thought his colleague Kate
Forbes' religion posed an issue and whether he'd allow her to serve in his
Cabinet. I'm a person of faith myself. I'll be fasting Ramadan in a number of
weeks time, but I don't legislate based on my faith. That is not the job I think
of representatives to do. So these are questions for Kate Forbes to answer. Our
party has done well by being a socially progressive political party. It has
garnered huge amounts of support by doing that. And I want to continue to make
sure we go down that socially progressive route. The MP Tim Farron was the
leader of the Liberal Democrats from 2015 to 2017. When he resigned, he said he
felt remaining faithful to Christ was incompatible with leading his party. His
new book, A Mucky Business, Why Christians Should Get Involved in Politics is
out now. And Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist and vice-chair of Humanists
UK. Humanists believe we can live ethical and fulfilling lives without religion
on the basis of reason. Good evening to you both. Tim Farron, you said you faced
questions about your Christian faith from the very first day of your leadership.
So leading a party brought your faith into focus in a way that really, that
before, wasn't scrutinised on the backbenches. I guess that's probably true. I
also think, just to cut the chase, that there are ways of being a Christian and
in leadership where you handle the questions that I got more wisely than I did.
Which would be what? I'm hopeful that Kate Forbes is a wiser person than I am.
Well, when you get asked questions about, as Kate did today, about what does the
Bible teach and issues to do with sexuality, personal morality, a better place
to go is to help people to go back. The Bible isn't a list of prohibitions. The
Bible is, if you like, a great love story from God to humanity. And I believe it
to be true. And if it is true, then it's going to change how you choose to live.
And it will also give you a very different worldview than if you don't believe
it. And as a liberal, I take the view that we've got to recognise that there are
multiple worldviews, and to be a liberal is to recognise there must be a place
for all of them in a civilised liberal democracy. Polly, don't be, surely, in a
pluralistic society, in a democracy, there should be space for any one of any
faith to lead their party or the country. Absolutely. And humanists are the
greatest defenders of people's right to believe whatever they want to believe.
But that's very different to if they step over the border of imposing religions
on other people. I mean, we now know that this country, in the last census,
Christians are now a minority. And the reason for that is a big shift towards
people who have no religion. And they don't want to have things imposed on them
by people who are getting their commandments from somewhere else. But what
people think privately is entirely the business. I mean, none of us, we call
ourselves rationalists. None of us are very rational. We all have different
irrationalities within us. So you don't particularly want to pick on the
religion, the religious, as being exceptionally unreasonable. But it is
unreasonable when you have 26 bishops in the House of Lords actually deciding on
our laws. Well, yes, because the reason we don't have an assisted dying law is
entirely because of the religious, because for many, many years now, the public
have been strongly 80% in favour of it. Tim Ferrin has a sort of secular
liberalism become ascendant. And actually, that makes it more difficult if there
is a perception that people like you with strongly held religious beliefs might
be imposing those values on others who simply don't share them. Yes, secular
liberalism and liberalism in name only, because I think this assumption that if
you have an absence of faith, you are a reasonable, rational person. And if you
have a faith, well, we'll tolerate you, but you're pretty eccentric. And I think
that it is wrong to think. So I say, I know exactly what Polly means, that she
doesn't want people imposing their religious faith on others. And I always, at
least I hope I do, take the view that it is not my job as a Christian in
politics to legislate to make people who are not Christians live as though they
were. However, to say that a person, everybody's got a worldview, nobody is
neutral at all, there is no neutrality. Let's establish that for sure. In which
case, the idea that if you have a religious faith, let's call it that, you have
to leave that value system at the door. But if you don't have one, then you can
take it with you. That's illiberal and it's total intellectual nonsense. Polly
Toynbee? Well, I think, to some extent, he's right that what people think
privately is their own business. But it's the moment it steps over into the
public. And I do think we have a disproportionate influence. The fact that 30%
of our state schools are run by religions, mostly C of E and Catholic and some
others, I mean, it's bizarre. Most people have nothing to do with it. And yet
they command that a third of our state education. Very briefly, Polly Toynbee,
do you think we pick on Christians in particular? After all, Hamza Yousuf is
Muslim, Rishi Sunak is Hindu. Should we look at other faiths and ask how
tolerant those faiths are? Of course. I mean, I haven't seen any sign of Rishi
Sunak or Sadi Khan or anyone imposing their religion on anyone else. So if it's
a private matter, that's their own business. As I've said, I don't think all of
us rationalists are necessarily all that rational. We don't claim superiority,
but we don't want anybody else interfering with our lives. Tim Farron, very
briefly, do you feel picked on? No. I mean, if you're a Christian, first of all,
you are to live counter-culturally. So if you are not standing out, you're doing
something wrong and our job, when we are got out, is to turn the other cheek,
not whine about it. Tim Farron, Polly Toynbee, thank you both. Douglas Latchford
was an art dealer, but he was also an art smuggler. And now an astonishing horde
of his has come to light in London, a vast trove of royal jewellery from
Cambodia's medieval and Korean empire. Cambodian experts say they've never seen
most of the jewellery before and are stunned by its existence. The loot's now
flown from the UK to Cambodia's capital, Phnom Penh. It's set to go on public
display later this year. Before the collection left London, Celia Hatton was
given a preview. We're entering a top secret compound in south London. I've got
to say, I think this is sort of what walking into a prison feels like. It's
holding long-lost treasures originally stolen from the Cambodian temples of
Angkor Wat. Eventually, we enter a small, brightly lit room. Inside, Cambodia's
Angkorian crown jewellery. Thousands of years of priceless history. It was
looted and then hidden away in London for decades. You can see the gold really
sparkling. Now, it's been rediscovered. We can see a row of crowns, one, two,
five crowns, and then this beautiful gold cup to think that this is solid gold
dating back to the 11th century. Great. Well that's great. Many of these pieces
were stolen in modern times, taken during the country's three decades of civil
war that began in the 1970s. They were funneled into a secret collection
belonging to the British dealer and known art smuggler Douglas Latchford. He
died in 2020 while awaiting trial in the US. It's still a mystery how these
artifacts ended up for sale in the UK. In an industrial area of North London, I
meet Brad Gordon, an American lawyer who's the head of Cambodia's investigations
team. He first saw the jewellery last summer. I was driven by a representative
of Latchford family to an undisclosed location. Latchford's family promised to
return his stolen collection to Cambodia after he died. The authorities didn't
know what they'd receive. They certainly didn't expect it to be handed over in a
parking lot. I was shown the back of the vehicle. Inside were four boxes of
Cambodia's greatest treasures. I felt like crying. Some of the jewellery has
surfaced before. Latchford included a handful of it in a book he co-wrote in
2008. Even after he was formally accused of dealing in stolen antiquities by the
US, he maintained his innocence. They've seen too many Indiana Jones films. Here
he is in a rare interview in 2004. As far as I know, there is no such thing as a
smuggling network. I certainly don't belong to any smuggling network. Last year,
our team travelled to Cambodia and met former looters who were now eyewitnesses.
They told us they stole items for Latchford, which he and his network then sold
on to private collections and UK institutions like the British Museum and the
V&A. I believe this is the greatest art crime in history. This went on for
decades. We asked the Met Police if Latchford's UK associates are also being
investigated. They declined to comment, noting they don't identify anyone under
investigation prior to being charged with a criminal offense. So in a very
careful process, a headdress has been unpacked from a box. Since we saw the
collection in London, it's been flown back to Phnom Penh in a top-secret
mission, where it's been welcomed by Cambodia's authoritarian leader Hun Sen.
He's facing another election this year and could paint this as a political win.
On the walls of Angkor Wat, now we're looking at what could be the real-life
object. Politics aside, Cambodians want their antiquities returned. After
decades in the dark, the jewellery will soon be on display and in the spotlight
once again. Celia Hatton reporting. As we've been hearing, it's almost a year
since the full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine, and all this week we'll hear
from people who've lost family and friends in the war. My World Tonight
colleague James Kumara-Sami has been speaking to Andri Shevchenko. He's the
former Ukrainian ambassador to Canada. Last July, his brother, Yevhen
Olafirenko, died in battle. He studied history and he got his education in one
of the best Ukrainian universities. And history was his passion. And I guess at
some point he realised that there are times to study history and there are times
when you are part of the history and it's up to you to make some history. And
that's what he did. And when the Russians invaded, were there any doubts in his
mind about what he would do? He had been preparing himself. He actually took
some classes at the military academy. He was a civilian, but there was an option
for civilians to take those classes and get some training. From day one he just
took his backpack and he showed up as a volunteer. And first he joined
territorial defense in Kiev and then quickly he moved to the armed forces of
Ukraine. And how did you and the rest of the family feel about it? Well, I think
from day one we knew that nothing should be taken for granted. And I think all
these months we worried about him. We also were so proud of him when he became a
platoon commander. And that's pretty much what we feel right now. I want to hear
a bit more about him. He was known as Elvis, wasn't he? Why was that? That was
his call sign. He had this fancy haircut. He loved music. He was a frontman of a
music band. His music wasn't like Elvis music. It was heavy metal, punk music. I
think it was terrible enough to use it as a psycho weapon against the Russians.
Black Forces the band was? Well, it's called Ukrainian Chorturi. You challenge
the Black Forces with your music. And I think in a way he felt he was
challenging the Black Forces with his decision to join the armed forces. And it
was a very successful, if sadly a short career in the armed forces. You said he
became platoon commander. Tell us a bit more about what battles he was involved
in. So yes, he joined territorial defense first and then he joined the
international division as platoon commander. He had three squads under him.
There were two Georgian squads and there was one mixed bag. His platoon was in
Lisey-Czansk. It was one of the most dangerous places to be and his platoon was
one of the last units to leave Lisey-Czansk. And he managed to get his platoon
out of there with no casualties, with no wounded soldiers under his command. And
he was the first casualty in his platoon. And what do you know, Andrea, about
the exact circumstances of his death? The Russians were preparing a major tank
assault and prior to this attack there was a heavy shell. So there was this
piece of shrapnel which went literally one centimeter above his bulletproof vest
and unfortunately that was enough to take away his life. It was a quick death
and his comrades were able to get him out of that place quickly enough to
collect his body but it wasn't quick enough to save his life. Do you remember,
I'm sure you do the moment you heard what had happened, what your thoughts were?
It's terrible. It's like you feel that part of yourself is cut off. And then I
had to take my sister and Yevhen's wife and my sister's boyfriend and altogether
we went to talk to Yevhen's mother and that was probably one of the most
difficult conversations I have ever had in my life. And I hope I would not have
to go off to anything like this for the rest of my life. I want to end, Andrea,
with perhaps a happier memory that you have of Yevhen from his youth. When you
think of him and you want to have warm and happy thoughts, what comes to mind?
Well, he was a very fun person to be around. He loved music so it was always
about music and it was also about travel. He loved to travel and after Yevhen
died, the family made a decision to split his ashes into three portions. One of
them is buried in this very important memorial cemetery, downtown Kiyo, and now
there are many new fresh stones there with our fighters and soldiers. We took
the second portion and we dispelled it over this beautiful bridge downtown Kiyo
over the Nipro River. He loved that place, he loved this city and he stood up to
defend the city. And we took the last portion to the Carpathian Mountains. He
was a great fan of travel and there was this one specific mountain that he loved
to climb. So the family went to the summit of this mountain and that's where we
led the last portion of his ashes to fly over the country that he was ready to
defend with his life. So for me, I think Yevhen will always be this fantastic
boy with this extraordinary smile, with his taste for music, for life, for
travel, and it's a great inspiration for the rest of my life. And an honor for
many, many people who knew him. That was James Kumaraasamy speaking to Andrey
Shevchenko about his brother Yevhen. Tonight's closing headline, President
Biden's pledged the United States long term support to Ukraine in its fight
against Russia. He was speaking during a surprise trip to Kiev today. That's the
world tonight. I'm Ruth Al-Ashar. I'll be back tomorrow at 10. But for now, from
me and everyone on the programme, good night. Studio direction was by Alison
Purcell-Davis. The editor was Jack Hunter. In just a moment, we begin a classic
Russian novel. First though, some advice on things to say to your smart speaker.
BBC Sounds. If you own a smart speaker, did you know you can access a whole
world of BBC content through it? To get started, just say open BBC Sounds. Then
ask your speaker to play whatever you want. You could listen to a music mix.
Like this. Play Focus Beats. Or try a new podcast. Play Desert Island Discs. And
of course, if you want to listen to live radio, you can just say Play Radio 4.
Music, radio and podcasts available on most smart speakers. Just say open BBC
Sounds to get started. Well, our book this week is considered the founding text
of modern Russian literature. It follows a young but world weary aristocrat
whose life in 1820s St Petersburg is one long blur of parties, dinners and
balls. Russian Stone reads Alexander Pushkin's novel in verse, Yushinonyegin. My
uncle, man of firm convictions, by falling gravely ill, he's won a due respect
for his afflictions. The only clever thing he's done. May his example profit
others, but God, what deadly boredom brothers to tend a sick man night and day,
not daring once to steal away. And oh, how base to pamper grossly and entertain
the nearly dead, to fluff the pillows for his head and pass him medicines
morosely while thinking under every sigh, the devil take you, uncle. Die! Just
so, a youthful rake reflected as through the dust by post he flew, by mighty
Zeus's will elected sole heir to all the kin he knew, Ludmilla's and Ruslan's
adherents. Without a forwards interference, may I present, as we set sail, the
hero of my current tale. Onyegin, my good friend and brother, was born beside
the neighbour's span, where maybe, reader, you began, or sparkled in one way or
other. I too there used to saunter forth, but found it noxious in the north. An
honest man who'd served sincerely, his father ran up debts galore. He gave a
ball some three times yearly, until he had no means for more. Fate watched
Eugene in his dependence. At first, Madame was in attendance, and then Monsieur
took on the child. A charming lad, though somewhat wild. Monsieur Labé, a needy
fellow, to spare his charge excessive pain, kept lessons light and rather plain.
His views on morals ever mellow. He seldom punished any luck, and walked the boy
in Lietni Park. We've all received an education in something, somehow, have we
not? So thank the law that in this nation a little learning means a lot. Onyegin
was, so some decided, strict judges not to be derided, a learned, if pedantic,
sort. He did possess the happy thought of free and easy conversation, or in a
grave dispute he'd wear the solemn experts' learned air, and keep to silent
meditation, and how the lady's eyes he lit with flashes of his sudden wit. How
early on he could dissemble, conceal his hopes, play jealous swain, compel
belief, or make a tremble, seem cast in gloom, or mute with pain, appear so
proud, or so forbearing, at times live, then uncaring. What languour when his
lips were sealed, what fiery art his speech revealed, what casual letters he
would send her. He lived, he breathed one single dream, how self-oblivious he
could seem, how keen his glance, how bold and tender, and when he wished he'd
make up here the quickly summoned glistening tear. Some mornings still abet he
drowses, until his valet brings his tray. What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
have asked him to a grand soiree. There'll be a ball, a children's party. Where
will he dash to, my good hearty? Where will he make the night's first call? Oh,
never mind. He'll make them all. But meanwhile, dressed for morning pleasure,
bedecked in broad-brimmed Bolivar, he drives to Niebski Bolivar, to stroll about
at total leisure until Brgé's unsleeping chime reminds him that it's dinner
time. He calls a sleigh as daylight's dimming. The cry resounds, Make way, let's
go! His collar with its beaver trimming is silver bright with frosted snow. He's
off to Talon's late and racing, quite sure he'll find cover and pacing. He
enters, cork and bottles spout as the comet wind comes gushing out. A bloody
roast beef's on the table, and truffles, use delight so keen, the very flower of
French cuisine, and Strasbourg pie. That deathless fable, while next to
Limburg's lively mould, sits Ananas in splendid gold. The theatre's full, the
boxes glitter, the restless gallery claps and roars, the stalls and pit are all
ajitter, the curtain rustles as it soars. And there, ethereal, resplendent,
poised to the magic bow attendant, a throng of nymphs, her guardian band,
Istomina, takes up her stand. One foot upon the ground she places, and then the
other slowly twirls, and now she leaps, and now she whirls like down from Eel's
lip she races, then spins, and twists, and stops to beat her rapid dazzling
dancing feet. As all applaud, Onyegin enters, and treads on toes to reach his
seat. His double glass he calmly centres on ladies he has yet to meet. He takes
a single glance to measure these clothes and faces with displeasure, then
trading bows on every side with men he knew, or friends he spied, he turned at
last, and vaguely fluttered his eyes toward the stage, and play, then yawned,
and turned his head away. It's time for something new, he muttered. I've
suffered ballets long enough, but now D-Glow is boring stuff. While the lamps,
both in and out, still glitter grandly all about, and while the horses bored at
tether still fidget, freezing in the snow, and coachmen by the fire's glow,
curse masters, and beat palms together, Onyegin now has left the scene and
driven home to change, and preen. Shall I abandon every scruple, and picture
truly, with my pen, the room where fashion's model pupil is dressed, undressed,
and dressed again? Whatever clever London offers to those with lavish whims and
coffers, and ships to us by Baltic seas, in trade for tallow and for trees,
whatever Paris seeking treasure, devises to attract the sight, or manufactures
for delight, for luxury, for modish pleasure, all this adorned his dressing
room, our sage of eighteen summers' bloom. At least three hours he peruses his
figure in the looking glass. Then, through his dressing room, he'll pass like
flighty Venus when she chooses, in man's attire, to pay a call at masquerade or
midnight ball. But look! Onyegin's at the gateway. He's past the porter, up the
stair, through marble entry rushes straightway, then runs his fingers through
his hair, and steps inside. The crush increases. The droning music never ceases.
A bold Mazorka grips the crowd. The press intents. The hubbub loud. The
guardsman clinks his spurs and dances. The charming ladies twirl their feet,
enchanting creatures that entreat a hot pursuit of flaming glances. While
muffled by the violin, the wise, their jealous gossip spin. But what of my
Eugene? Half-drowsing. He drives to bed from last night's ball, while
Petersburg, already rousing, answers the drumbeat's duty call. The merchant's
up. The peddler scurries. With jug in hand, the milkmaid hurries. Crackling the
freshly fallen snow, the cabby plods to Hackney Row. Impleasant hubbub mourns,
awaking. The shutters open. Smoke ascends in pale blue shafts from chimney ends.
The German baker's up and baking. And more than once in cotton cap has opened up
his window trap. But, wearied by the ballroom's clamour, he sleeps in blissful
sheer delight. This child of comfort and of glamour, who turns each morning into
night. By afternoon he'll finally waken, the day ahead all planned and taken,
the endless round, the varied game. Tomorrow, too, will be the same. But was he
happy in the flower? The very springtime of his days, amid his pleasures and
their blaze, amid his conquests of the hour? Or was he profligate and hale, amid
his feasts to no avail? Yes. Soon he lost all warmth of feeling. The social buzz
became a bore, and all those beauties, once appealing, were objects of his
thought no more. Inconsidency grew too fatiguing, and friends and friendship
less intriguing, for after all he couldn't drain an endless bottle of champagne
to help those pies and beefsteaks settle, or go on dropping words of wit with
throbbing head about to split. And so, for all his fiery metal, he did at last
give up his love of pistol, sword and ready glove. We still, alas, cannot
forestall it, this dreadful ailment's heavy toll. The spleen is what the English
call it, we call it simply Russian soul. To as this our hero had contracted, and
though, thank God, he never acted to put a bullet through his head, his former
love of life was dead. I, too, had parted with convention, with vain pursuit of
worldly ends, and when Eugene drew my attention, I liked his ways, and we made
friends. I liked his natural bent for dreaming, his strangeness that was more
than seeming, the cold, sharp mind that he possessed. I was embittered, he
depressed. With passion's game, we both were sated. The fire in both our hearts
was pale. Our lives were weary, flat and stale. Eugene and I had both decided to
make the foreign tour we'd planned, but all too soon our paths divided, for fate
took matters into hand. His father died, quite unexpected, and round Eugene
there soon collected the greedy hoard, demanding pay, each to his own, or so
they say. Eugene, detesting litigation, and quite contented with his fate,
released to them the whole estate, with no great sense of deprivation. Perhaps
he also dimly knew his aged uncle's time was due. And sure enough, a note came
flying. The bailiff wrote as if on cue, how Negan's uncle, sick and dying, would
like to bid his heir adieu. He was prepared, like any craven, to sigh, deceive,
and play his part, with which my novel took its start. But when he reached his
uncle's haven, a laid-out corpse was what he found, prepared as tribute for the
ground. He found the manor fairly bustling with those who'd known the now
deceased. Both friends and foes had come a-hustling, true lovers of a funeral
feast. They laid to rest the deer departed, then whined and dined, and heavy-
hearted, but pleased to have their duty done, the priests and guests left one by
one. And here's O Negan, lord and master of woods, and mills, and streams, and
lands, a country squire. There he stands, that former waste-rel and disaster.
And rather glad he was, it's true, that he'd found something else to do.