TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on Saturday. On FM, on Longwave, on Digital and on BBC Sounds, this is BBC
Radio 4. It's ten o'clock, good evening, welcome to the World Tonight with James
Kimarasamy. As we found out through this process, once you leave the safety of
your home, you are on your own. So many people being paid that night to protect
our kids and yet so many failed in their duties. A mother's anguish, but were
the security services to blame for the Manchester Arena bombing? The public
inquiry has found the attack might have been prevented. We get reaction from a
former head of the UK's Joint Intelligence Committee. Also, a former Prime
Minister's verdict on the current Prime Minister's Northern Ireland deal. I'm
going to find it very difficult to vote for something myself because there's
something like this myself because I believed that we should have done something
different. The Nigerian author Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie's verdict on her
country's presidential election. For me this is a slap to the face of the
Nigerian people. It's an insult to the collective intelligence of Nigerians.
And... We remember Pulp's bassist Steve Mackey who's died at the age of 56. It's
all after the BBC News read tonight by Andrew Peach. The head of MI5 has said
he's profoundly sorry the security service didn't prevent the Manchester Arena
attack in which 22 people died. A public inquiry found that MI5 missed a
significant chance to take action that might have stopped the 2017 bombing after
an Ariana Grande concert. The inquiry's third and final report into the atrocity
also deals with the radicalisation of the bomber Salman Abedi. Daniel de Simone
reports from Manchester. The findings of inquiry chairman Sir John Saunders are
devastating. His report details how before the attack the security service MI5
received two pieces of intelligence that were highly relevant to the plot and
concludes that if different actions had occurred then MI5 might have questioned
the suicide bomber Salman Abedi on his arrival in the UK days before the attack
and even followed him from the airport to a store of explosives. Sir John says
the reasons for one missed chance included a failure by an MI5 officer to act
swiftly enough on key intelligence. There are indications the government could
maintain its current level of support for household energy bills beyond next
month. The cap on bills is currently due to rise from the start of April at the
same time as the £400 energy rebate scheme ends. But suppliers are already
assuming the existing support will continue as our business editor Simon Jack
explains. Industry sources have told the BBC that energy companies have already
amended future bills to reflect that government energy support will continue at
current levels beyond April 1st. The current support which caps bills for a
typical household at £2,500 a year is due to be reduced allowing average bills
to rise to £3,000 a year. There's been intense speculation about whether the
government will extend support at its current level given that lower wholesale
prices have saved the government billions compared to previous estimates of the
cost of that support. The fact that energy companies are already amending
customer bills suggests they have been told the government has already decided
to extend support at its current level. Boris Johnson has warned he'll struggle
to support Rishi Sunak's new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland because he
believes it won't allow the UK to take back control from Brussels. The former
Prime Minister was commenting for the first time on the agreement which was
announced by Rishi Sunak on Monday. This from our political correspondent Ben
Wright. Speaking at a conference in London, the former Prime Minister said he
would find it very difficult to vote for the deal, describing it as a drag
anchor on the UK's ability to divert from EU laws and standards. Mr Johnson said
he hoped the deal would work, but if it didn't, the government should have the
guts to deploy the Northern Ireland Protocol Bill – controversial legislation he
introduced but Rishi Sunak has pulled. The question now is whether a chunk of
Tory MPs follow Mr Johnson's lead. The senior civil servant who investigated
government lockdown parties has been offered a job as the Chief of Staff to the
Labour leader Sakhiya Starmer. Sue Gray has resigned from her role as second
permanent secretary in the Department for levelling up housing and communities.
Here's our political correspondent Helen Catt. Sue Gray has long been viewed in
Westminster as an unimpeachable arbiter of standards. It was to Ms Gray, who's a
former head of propriety and ethics, that Boris Johnson's government turned to
produce the definitive report on Partygate. But her decision to resign from the
civil service after being offered the job with Labour has raised eyebrows.
Allies of Mr Johnson have reacted angrily. Jacob Rees-Mogg suggested it now
looked like Ms Gray's report was a left-wing stitch-up against a Tory Prime
Minister. A Cabinet Office spokesperson has said it was reviewing the
circumstances under which Ms Gray resigned. The former Health Secretary Matt
Hancock has accused a journalist of a massive betrayal and breach of trust after
she leaked messages he sent and received during the height of the Covid
pandemic. Isabelle Oakeshott has insisted she acted in the national interest.
Here's our political correspondent Jonathan Blake. The publication of more of
Matt Hancock's messages has prompted a bitter public row between the former
Health Secretary and the journalist who helped him write his book, Pandemic
Diaries. Isabelle Oakeshott has admitted breaking a legal agreement by giving
the messages to The Telegraph, but denied she'd done it for money, saying
instead it was about getting to the truth in the national interest. Matt Hancock
accused her of a massive betrayal and breach of trust. In a statement he said
there was absolutely no public interest case and that all the materials for his
book had been made available to the public inquiry into the UK's response to the
pandemic. Rail workers in Greece have held a one-day strike protesting about
what they say has been decades of lax standards and underinvestment after the
country's worst ever train crash on Tuesday. At least 57 people are now known to
have died in the collision between a passenger service and a freight train. A
man and a woman have been charged with several offences after the remains of a
baby were found in a wooded area near Brighton. Constance Martin and Mark Gordon
are due to appear before magistrates tomorrow. Here's John Donison. The Crown
Prosecution Service said Constance Martin and Mark Gordon had been charged with
gross negligence manslaughter, concealing the birth of a child and perverting
the course of justice. The remains of a baby were found yesterday in an area of
woodland near Brighton following a two-day search. This afternoon, police said
it was too early to say when the infant died but said it may have been some time
ago. They said it was not yet possible to determine the sex of the baby. Ms
Martin, who's 35, and Mr Gordon, who's 48, were arrested in Brighton on Monday
after being missing for several weeks. President Putin has accused a Ukrainian
sabotage group of opening fire on civilians in southern Russia in what he called
a terrorist act. Russia's FSB security service claimed that the Bryansk region
was attacked by a Ukrainian military drone and that saboteurs had taken
hostages. The Kremlin says the situation is now under control. The details of
what happened haven't been verified. Ukraine has denied all responsibility and
accused Russia of staging a false classic provocation. Wayne Shorter, one of
America's greatest jazz saxophonists, has died at the age of 89. Wayne Shorter
played with the likes of Miles Davis, Joni Mitchell and Carlos Santana and
performed with the hugely successful 1970s fusion group Weather Report. He won
12 competitive Grammys over his long career, the last of which came just last
month. Thanks Andrew. You're listening to The World Tonight with James
Kimarasamy. Could the 2017 Manchester Arena bombing have been prevented? That is
a key question addressed in the third and final report of the public inquiry
into what happened. The 207-page report which was published today focused on the
bomber Salman Abedi, his radicalisation and the sequence of events which led him
to detonate the explosives which killed 22 people at the Ariana Grande concert.
The chair of the inquiry, Sir John Saunders, said that because of failures by
MI5 to share information and to act swiftly enough on intelligence, there had
been what he called a significant missed opportunity to take action that might
have prevented the attack. The head of MI5, Ken McCallum, gave his response to
the inquiry's findings. Gathering covert intelligence is difficult, but had we
managed to seize the slim chance we had, those impacted might not have
experienced such appalling loss and trauma. I am profoundly sorry that MI5 did
not prevent the attack. Catherine Carey lost her 19-year-old son Liam in the
attack. She says she would never forgive all of those who missed chances to save
her son. Forgiveness will never be an option for such evil intentions and those
that played any part in the murder of our children will never ever get
forgiveness. From top to bottom, from MI5 to the associates of the attacker, we
will always believe that you all played a part in the murder of our children. We
will spend the rest of our lives trying to protect our boys because as we found
out through this process, once you leave the safety of your home, you are on
your own. Well, joining us now, our correspondent Daniel DeSimone. Daniel, just
tell us a bit more about the missed opportunities that Sir John Saunders spoke
about. Well, there were two in particular. In the months before the attack, Sir
John sets out how MI5 twice received key pieces of intelligence that were
actually highly relevant to the developing plot. And he says the first should
have been shared with the police and it wasn't. And he says that it's of concern
that it wasn't shared. On the second piece, he criticizes MI5 and says they were
too slow in how they dealt with it. In particular, an officer didn't write a
report on it on the day they assessed it. He says that had the response been
quicker, it could have led to investigative actions that would have led
potentially to Sam Labade being stopped at the airport when he arrived from
Libya four days before the bombing. And Sir John goes further and gives an
example and says that had he been looked at at the airport when he came in, MI5
officers might have followed him from the airport. And what he actually did when
he left the airport was get a taxi immediately to a car where he'd stored
explosives. And Sir John says that had MI5 officers followed him, they might
have found those explosives and the plot might have been prevented. Now MI5 had
offered its own account of what had happened and it and it differed from Sir
John's findings, didn't it, in a couple of areas? One thing was very striking
today. It emerged during the inquiry hearings that there'd been an official MI5
assessment of the case and that their final assessment was that no one other
than Salman Abadi, the suicide bomber, and his brother Hashim, who's now serving
life in prison, were knowingly involved in the plot. The chairman Sir John today
found it was probable that they had had assistance from somebody or maybe more
than one person in Libya and that this would have involved advice, assistance
about bomb making. And he said that that could have come fairly early in 2016
and also into 2017. So that was really quite a striking finding. And this is
partly because Sir John spoke to frontline analysts, frontline officers, not
just senior figures within MI5. That's right. He says he really kind of feels
vindicated in adopting the approach he did, which was to go into closed
hearings, which allowed him to question MI5 officers and staff who were directly
involved in the decision making around the intelligence. And he says that MI5's
corporate position was really quite out of step with those officers. So rather
than just having a single corporate witness who had a rather kind of
retrospective justification of things that had happened, he was allowed, he was
able to really question the officers and really understand what had gone on.
Daniel, many thanks. Daniel DeSimone there. And just an apology for the name of
Liam Currie's mother. It's Caroline Currie, not Catherine Currie, as I said
earlier. Now, Richard Scorer is head of abuse law and public inquiries at Slater
& Gordon. He represented a number of the Manchester Arena victims' families. And
I asked him for the family's reaction to today's report. Well, it's been a very
difficult day today. I think we knew going into this that there was a lot of
evidence that the security services and counterterrorism police had possibly
dropped the ball in relation to Salman Abadi and his activities and had missed
opportunities to prevent the attack. But obviously, what we've heard today is a
lot more specific. There were clearly identified in the report opportunities to
prevent this attack, and those opportunities were missed. And obviously, that's
pretty devastating for the families to hear. It's important that it's out there
and that it's known and that it's addressed, but it's very difficult to hear.
The report concludes the attack might have been prevented. You'd acknowledge,
would you not, the difference between might and would? It still was a might.
Yes, of course. And we can't know what would have happened if these particular
opportunities had been taken and things had been dealt with in a different way.
But obviously, it's a real concern to see that those failings happened. And we
have to make sure those are addressed in the future. Before this came out, you
said you wanted the report to be, quote, clear sighted and brave in its
conclusions. Do you think it was? I think Sir John Saunders has been an
exemplary chair of this inquiry. He's approached his task with real forensic
skill. He's been uncompromising in his recommendations. So I think we have
confidence in him. The issue now is whether these recommendations are going to
be implemented that that will be monitored partly by the inquiry. But in
relation to the security services, those will be in a closed report and the
Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament will see those. They will have
the responsibility, we understand, of monitoring their implementation. That's a
heavy responsibility and they have to make sure they discharge that properly.
It's crucial, not just for the victims here and their families, but for all of
us. The head of MI5, Ken McCallum, has apologised, said he's profoundly sorry
that the security service didn't prevent the attack and didn't manage to seize,
quote, the slim chance that it had to do so. Are you confident that the
conclusions of this inquiry will make a difference to how the security services
operate? We certainly want them to make a difference, obviously. And, you know,
an apology is welcome. But in the end, it will depend on whether recommendations
are implemented. And as I say, it's Parliament that now has the responsibility
to ensure that happens. And they must do that. Jonathan Hall, the independent
reviewer of terrorism legislation, told the PM programme earlier, he said,
ultimately, human judgment is human judgment and it's inevitable that some
mistakes will be made. What would you say to those who say it's never going to
be possible to prevent every attack? I think, of course, you cannot eliminate
the possibility of human error. But when you're dealing with this kind of
situation, human error happens within a system. So what we have to do is ensure
that the system works as effectively and as smoothly as possible. That's the
challenge. And that's what we need to change in the future. And it's about
systems rather than resources, would you agree? Again, that seems to come out of
the report that it wasn't about resources. That seems to be the conclusion of
the report. And obviously, we accept that. So, John, in previous reports has
been very clear where he's been concerned that resources have been inadequate.
And when he was looking, for example, at the response of the emergency services
and the police to the bombing, he was clear about where resources were an issue.
He hasn't suggested today that resources were an issue. And obviously, we accept
that conclusion. Clearly, the victim's family's very distraught. A couple of
quotes I want to give you from families, not ones you represent. Andrew Rousos,
his eight year old daughter, Safi Rose, was killed, said, in my view, the fact
that MI5 failed to stop him, despite all of the red flags available,
demonstrates they are not fit to keep us safe and therefore not fit for purpose.
And Caroline Currie, who's the mother of Liam Currie, who died, said MI5, as
well as associates of the attacker, quote, played a part in the murder of our
children. And once you leave the safety of your home, you are on your own. Do
you share their assessment of MI5 that they are not fit for purpose and they
can't keep people safe? I think the reactions that you've just quoted are
completely understandable. And we have to make sure in the future that the
lessons of what's being revealed today are properly learned and that
recommendations are fully implemented. That has to happen. And, you know, it is
a responsibility both of Parliament and obviously of other bodies to ensure that
that does happen. Richard Scorer, a lawyer who represents some of the Manchester
Arena victims' families. Well, joining me in the studio is Lord Ricketts, Peter
Ricketts, crossbencher who served as Government National Security Advisor and as
Chair of the UK's Joint Intelligence Committee. Good evening, Lord Ricketts.
Good evening. You heard what some of the families said about this after the
inquiry was published. The MI5 isn't fit for purpose, isn't able to keep the
public safe. What do you make of that assessment? Well, my heart goes out to the
families. Their anguish this day, as in so many days, is clear. More for them to
absorb from this tough but I think very fair report. And I think for MI5, the
problem is that they are dealing in a world where they have hundreds of
different leads any one day, thousands of fragmentary bits of intelligence. They
have to put it together into a pattern, find connections. And very often they
succeed. I think on this difficult day for MI5, it's worth saying 37 late stage
attack plots were foiled between the Manchester bombings and today. The problem
with their business is when they succeed, we don't know. But if they miss a key
clue or don't make a connection, then there can be devastating results, as we
saw in Manchester. And I know this organisation, they believe strongly in
learning. They will want to squeeze every last drop of learning possible out of
this report and will take it immensely seriously. We did hear though that there
was contradiction between the MI5's account of the build-up to the attack and
Sir John Saunders' report. And he significantly, as we heard, spoke to analysts,
to operatives, and the sense is perhaps they haven't looked themselves in the
mirror as they might have done at MI5. The advantage of a report like Sir John
Saunders is that he has been able to spend a great deal of time, bring his own
judgment and that of witnesses to bear on these events, isolate them from
everything else that was going on, and really get to the bottom of them. And I
don't think anybody else, probably including the Internal Security Service
review, had the time and resources to do that. And as you say, he did speak to
the frontline officers. Very often, organisations want to protect their junior
desk officers in inquiries. They want the more senior management to give an
overview. I think he was absolutely right this time to go to the frontline
people. And I think what he's done is clarified things. I don't think the
Security Service ever tried to mislead, but this is clearer and more specific
and the lessons learned will be clearer. Well, what about the lessons learned
from what he calls several examples of communication failures? This seems to be
something of a recurring theme, doesn't it? After the 7-7 attacks here in
London, questions about communication failures. Can the public be reassured that
lessons have been learned? Well, I think if you look at the trend of terrorism
over the last 20 years, from those massive attacks in 9-11, we all thought after
that, that those massive attacks could become the norm. There could be more and
more of them. In fact, the Security Service and others have got on top of the
counter-terrorist threat pretty well, and the trend has been clearly downwards.
They do learn lessons. Things are improving. I think they've got a lot better.
But this communications problem, I mean, it comes down partly, I think, to IT. I
think there are probably different IT systems between the Security Service and
the police. That's a well-known problem in government. Absolutely, it needs to
be solved. I understood from the Director General that they've made a hundred
different changes already. I hope some of those will improve the communications.
So the systems are improving, are they? Because what's been identified here, it
matters perhaps of human judgment. That's always going to be a problem, isn't
it? Humans are always going to err. But if the systems in place are not
sufficient, there are very serious consequences potentially. Particularly in
this line of business. I mean, the responsibility that the service covers there
where if you make a mistake, it can lead to a devastating attack. That is awful.
You're right, because their profession is about making judgments every day. What
is likely to be the most deadly plot that is on our table today? And of course,
human beings can get that wrong. If systems and IT and better processes within
the services and within government can help, then all of that is making them
more robust. I don't think it's that they're not fit for purpose. I think it's
an incredibly difficult target they've got. Now they've got Russian and Chinese
state threats as well as counter-terrorism, and they need all the help they can
to make sure their human judgment is as sharp and accurate as possible. Lord
Ricketts, thank you very much indeed. Now, on last night's programme, we heard
about Nigeria's President-elect Bola Tinabu, the 70-ish political godfather, and
about the doubts over his election victory. Well, tonight, the runner-up in that
election has described it as a rape of democracy, while the third-placed Labour
Party candidate, Peter Obi, who drew his support from young Nigerians, has
claimed that he was the winner and he said that he will challenge the result in
the court. Well, the World Tonight's James Menendez has been speaking to one of
Mr Obi's prominent supporters, the critically acclaimed Nigerian writer
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, whose works include Half of a Yellow Sun and
Americana. He asked her whether she thought that Mr Obi would win. Well, I hoped
he would win because I think he brought a vision of honesty and hope that
inspired many Nigerians. But I was prepared that he might not win. I thought it
would be quite a tough battle for him. So all I wanted, I think all most
Nigerians wanted, was an election which was fair and transparent. And if that
had happened, I think so many Nigerians would not be complaining today. They
would be disappointed, as one is when one's candidate does not win. But I think
they would not have the despair and the rage and the disillusionment that is so
prevalent in Nigeria right now. I mean, as we heard from him a little earlier,
he said that the people of Nigeria have been robbed by our supposed leaders. I
mean, was this a fraudulent election, do you think? I think it was. I actually
think that it was fundamentally flawed. And there is overwhelming evidence of
this. It was not transparent. It was not fair. I do not think it reflects the
will and the voice of the Nigerian people. I also do not think that anybody of
good conscience can see that the president-elect has emerged through a
transparent process. And so because of this, I think the election is not
legitimate. There were clearly logistical problems, but do you think the results
were actually manipulated then? Oh, they were very much manipulated. And there's
evidence of this. I mean, people all over social media sharing photographs of
election sheets from the polling units, which have been so obviously doctored
and manipulated, and in some ways actually done in ways that are so brazen and
also quite unintelligent in its obviousness. And so it seems to me, for me, this
is a slap to the face of the Nigerian people. It's an insult to the collective
intelligence of Nigerians, because one of the things that having phones and
access to phone cameras has done is that it has made it possible for Nigerians
to document this manipulation. And if they've documented it, does that make it
much easier to challenge it in court, as it seems to be the intention? Yes, yes,
I think it does. But I do have to say that I'm wary about this idea of the
judiciary being the solution, because we have a history in which the Nigerian
judiciary cannot really be said to be independent, especially with political
cases. Of course, one hopes that they will be this time, but it's difficult to
have full confidence. So how do voters, particularly those young voters, how do
they channel their frustrations? Does it mean people going out onto the streets,
do you think? You know, I think everyone should have the right to dissent. I
think if they choose to go out to the streets, I think that's valid as long as
it's peaceful. And one of the things that's remarkable about this movement of
young people, which was largely inspired by Pitaopi, is that it's a peaceful
movement. It's a movement that wants a kind of new Nigeria. It's actually in
some ways quite idealistic. So I think young people, despite their
disappointment, I think that they have seen that there is a possibility of
change. And yet, turnout was extremely low, just over a quarter of registered
voters. Does that worry you? It doesn't worry me, because I'm not sure that it's
true. But even if it were true, I think that there is a lot to be said for voter
suppression. There were many cases of voter suppression. You know, if you make
voting difficult for people, then invariably people will not vote. So what
should happen now? I mean, should the election be cancelled and rerun, as some
have suggested? I think that would be the best option, because I think the court
should be absolute last resort. And so I think that the better thing to do would
be to redo the elections. It's not going to happen, though, is it? Well, you
know, one never knows. Maybe unicorns exist. The Nigerian author Chimamanda
Ngozi Adichie speaking to my colleague James Menendez. The opening of Babies by
Pulp, the Sheffield band whose bassist Steve Mackey has died at the age of 56.
His wife Katie announced his death today on social media, saying that he had
been in hospital with an undisclosed illness for the past three months. Well,
Steve joined the band in 1989. He played on hits including Common People and
Disco 2000. He went on to be a successful producer. And we're joined now by a
friend of his, Crispin Hunt, songwriter, former lead singer of fellow Sheffield
band The Long Pigs. Crispin, well, first of all, condolences. You started out a
long time together, didn't you? Well, I thank you very much, James. Yeah, this
is an absolute tragedy. And I'm maybe not the best qualified person to speak
about Steve. There were many of my great friends who knew him, who were greater
friends of Steve. But I've known Steve for 30 years, and he was a completely
iconic, iconic figure in Sheffield. In the early days, we all used to hero
worship him because he was just devastatingly cool. And not only kind of
physically one of the most beautiful people I've ever met, but also kind of
creatively and spiritually and just his drive behind. I don't think we should
underestimate Jarvis, of course, is an extraordinary genius. But we shouldn't
underestimate the influence that Steve had in creating the kind of signature
genre of its own, the pulp that pulp was. Steve was a kind of creative polymath
and anything he turned his hand to, he seemed to kind of master really that he
decided to. And it's a real tragedy. He was just about to start an extremely
exciting career in fashion photography. I think he was working, he'd been
working with Gucci and Armani. And, and as a producer, he was he was amazing. If
you listen to everything now by by Arcade Fire, which he produced, that's a sort
of that's a really good example of his of his skill and talent. I mean, it was a
it's a real tragedy. And just tell us about his time in pulp. He joined them for
their third album, and famously, they took they were slow burn, wouldn't they,
to become successful, but he was there for their big moments. I think so. Yeah,
I mean, I think pulp have been in various forms around Sheffield. We'd been as a
sort of fellow Sheffield band, pulp, pulp, were a were a were a kind of icon
within Sheffield, but it took them quite a long time to really hit it big. But
Steve was there as part of it. And they honed their, their, their own very,
their very own genre, and their very own style. They were they were grouped in
with Britpop, but they but they shaped very something extremely different that I
think has shaped us all carrying on and the fact that the pulp are still now
that it's it's, it's, it's a it's it's not a it's not a brand because a brand is
is bland, but as a band, they are they are an amazing, an amazing icon. And he
went on, as you said, yeah, he went on to shape other bands, didn't he other
artists, you mentioned Arcade Fire, but Florence and the Machine, of course,
MIA. Yeah, really, I mean, really early on, I think he produced Kissed with a
Kissed with a Fist by Florence and the Machine. And I've worked with with
Florence as well. And she was she was extraordinary. But those early, those
early records, I think it was it was Steve had a great part to play with kind of
inspiring Florence to, to become the thing that she was. And he was he was an
incredibly generous person. I think there's a great friend of mine called Danny
Goffey, who who Steve, who Danny and Danny is the drummer from Supergrass, but
also an amazing artist himself. And he made his first album, solo album, and
Steve offered to mix it completely for free and refused to take any money just
because he wanted to be a part of that creative process. And it's a real
tragedy. And I think he was just about to start an incredibly new, creative
chapter in in photography and in fashion. And and I think it's it's an absolute
tragedy that that chapter is now will always be unfinished. Crispin, many
thanks. Crispin Hunt, songwriter, former lead singer with the Long Pigs,
remembering Steve Mackey, bassist with Pulp, who has died. Now, after months of
anti-government protests, something else is spreading across Iran. Poison. Girls
from 26 schools in five different Iranian cities are reported to have been taken
to hospital as a result of mysterious poisonings. There's speculation the girls
may have been targeted because girls played such a central role in the protests,
which began when a young woman who allegedly broke the country's strict Islamic
dress code died in police custody. Tonight, the White House national security
spokesman has called the reported poisonings deeply concerning and said the
world needed to know what was behind them. The BBC's Farhanak Amidi has spoken
to some people inside Iran who have been affected. The poisoning started over
three months ago, sometime in November, and the first school to be affected was
in the city of Qom, which is a very religious and conservative city. In that
first incident, 18 girls were poisoned. And it kept on spreading and spreading
based on this latest article that I read in an Iranian newspaper, a daily
newspaper called Etemad. At least 58 schools have been attacked and something
about 1000 students have been poisoned so far. But all of these are just
estimations. It's really, really hard to verify these. Yes, it's clearly very
difficult to get credible information from inside Iran. But who might be behind
these attacks? There are so many different theories. The public are pointing
their fingers at the government, the state. The deputy health minister also came
out and said that these attacks were deliberate and it was because certain
people among the authorities wanted girls' schools to shut down. When you're on
social media and listening to what people are saying and commenting, they
believe that the state wants to take revenge for the protests. Because we have
to remember the protests were women-led. It started with women taking off their
scarves. The main slogan of the protests were women, life, freedom. And one
thing that I think surprised many people, not only inside Iran, but all over the
world, was the participation of schoolgirls in these protests and their bravery
of filming themselves and bringing down the photos of the supreme leader from
their classes saying death to the dictator. So a lot of people believe that this
is revenge. In terms of what the authorities themselves are saying, what is
their line? To be honest with you, when you listen to the authorities, the only
thing that will happen is you will get very confused. That's the reality.
Generally, the official narrative is that they don't really know what is
happening. They don't know who is behind these attacks. But the health ministry
has announced that they are using the top toxicologists to study and come up
with what was used to poison these girls. However, nothing has come out yet.
Now, you've been speaking to people inside Iran who've been directly affected by
these poisonings, haven't you? What have they been telling you? It's very
difficult to get people to talk to journalists at the moment in Iran. But those
who have spoken to me, one student, she spoke to me. She was from a city called
Shahriar, and her school was attacked on Saturday. So what she basically told me
was that she goes to school on Saturday morning, and there is this really
strong, pungent smell. But they have no idea where this smell is coming from,
and they don't know what it is. And after a while, after a few hours, the smell
just stops. But then students start getting dizzy. They start feeling nauseous.
They feel this severe fatigue. And the next day, a lot of them don't come to
school. Even one teacher, she told me, their English teacher fell ill and didn't
come to school. What she was telling me, she was like, at that time, she had no
idea what was going on. She just thought it was just a random thing, until two
days later, when the wave of these poisonings happened around the country and
made it to the news. I think you've also been talking to the father of one of
the girls who's been affected. Yes, I did speak to a father. His daughter was in
the school that was attacked on Tuesday. After that, students started collapsing
one after another. In my daughter's class, there were girls with asthma and
heart problems. A huge number of the students were taken to hospital and we
don't know at the moment how they are. So there he is. He's talking about the
girls with asthma and heart problems and collapsing one after another when they
were sent to the schoolyard. What else did he tell you? He was furious because
he said when he got to the school, there was a sense of panic and commotion.
There were ambulances and the parents were so angry that they were shouting
death to Khamenei, death to the dictator. And this father was telling me that he
basically has no hope that anyone is going to be held accountable. That was the
BBC's Farhanak Amidi on those mysterious poisonings in Iran. Well, let's turn
now to developments in Westminster on a day when one former Prime Minister
withheld his support from the current Prime Minister's Northern Ireland deal.
And there was news about a new job offer for the civil servant who became a
household name when she investigated Downing Street lockdown parties. Let's
speak to our political correspondent, Damian Grammaticus. All of that in a
moment, Damian. But as we've got used to, there is also news of more WhatsApp
messages being reported in the Daily Telegraph. What can you tell us about the
latest ones? Yes, Jamie. Well, tonight what we've got is the Daily Telegraph
publishing some more WhatsApp messages. This is Matt Hancock in February 2021.
It was the day that the policy of putting people arriving in the country from
abroad, from red list hotspot COVID countries abroad into quarantine in hotels
and airports. And you have Matt Hancock sending a sharing a story from the Daily
Mail about COVID police stopping passengers at Bristol Airport. And he just
simply texted one word, brilliant, he said. Just a little bit later the same
day, the Cabinet Secretary Simon Case, he said, I just want to see some of the
faces of people coming out of first class and into a Premier in shoebox. And
then a couple of weeks later, the two of them saying, Mr. Case saying, any idea
how many people we locked up in hotels yesterday, Mr. Hancock? None, but 149
chose to enter the country and are now in quarantine hotels due to their own
free will, exclamation mark. Hilarious, replies Simon Case. I think the tone of
that is what will upset people perhaps. And again, then a little bit later in
March, Matt Hancock and Boris Johnson, Matt Hancock sharing a story about a
couple who were fined £10,000 each for failing to observe quarantine when they
returned from a trip to Dubai. Boris Johnson replied simply with one word,
superb. Given that Mr. Johnson was then fined, I think people may raise eyebrows
at that. Yes, well, Mr. Johnson himself has been speaking today, hasn't he,
about Rishi Sunak's Northern Ireland deal. Not too impressed by the sound of
things. Well, yes, he so he has broken his silence on this and said he's going
to find it very difficult to vote for it. And he would have done something
different. Now he says that because he says, oh, this isn't what I thought of as
Brexit. And it should be the whole of the UK should be leaving the ambit of the
EU. Now, that clearly isn't very helpful to his successor, Rishi Sunak. But I
think the interesting thing is Boris Johnson did also say that he said, well, I
can see the way the political momentum is going. And that by that he means Mr.
Sunak's way, because senior Tories who backed Boris Johnson, who backed Brexit,
have been coming out saying they like what Mr. Sunak has got here. And although
we're waiting for some Tory Brexit supporting MPs, Ulster Unionists waiting to
hear their verdict, what I think you might see from here is Mr. Johnson, maybe,
you know, there isn't a groundswell of opposition evident against Rishi Sunak's
deal, but he's perhaps Mr. Johnson is positioning. So in future, he could say if
things don't work out well with this deal, look, I told you so we should have
done something different. Well, someone we were waiting for for some time was
Sue Gray, the civil servant who, of course, wrote that report about the Downing
Street lockdown parties. And she's in the news again today, isn't she? Yeah. So
there's sort of crossover between all of these events today. So yes, exactly.
The lockdown text messages. Now, we also have Sue Gray, who was the, we were all
waiting for Sue Gray's report. That was very critical. She talked about failures
of leadership and judgment in number 10, which she was very critical of. What's
happened today? We've heard that she's resigned her job in the civil service and
she's been offered a job as Sakeer Starmer's chief of staff at the heart of the
Labour Party, the Labour Party leader's office. And that has really angered
conservatives. So former Minister Jacob Rees-Mogg has said that, you know, this
means her conclusions into the party investigations were like a left wing stitch
up. And a spokesperson for Boris, or someone close to Boris Johnson, also has
been very critical, saying it leads to the inevitable conclusion that Partygate
was a Labour stitch up, although Partygate was the parties, of course. Damian,
thanks very much, Damian Grammaticus. Now, I'm as partial to an ice cream tea at
a National Trust property as an ex-person, but Sarah Merker isn't just an ex-
person. She's a marketing director from Isleworth in West London, and she's just
completed a 10-year journey around the UK's 244 National Trust properties that
have a tea room or a restaurant. And she has sampled a scone at every single one
of them and has blogged about it. It's a project that she started with her late
husband, Peter, and she's on the line now. Hello, good evening. Hello. So why
did you initially decide to embark on this journey? Well, I joined the National
Trust in 2013 and was a bit worried that I might not use my membership as much
as I should. So I thought, you know, when I write things down, I remember it. So
I'll start a blog, write about each property, the history of each property, you
know, everything that's gone on there, and then have a scone at each one and use
the scone as a sort of a common thread. And yeah, I thought it would take a few
years, didn't think it would take 10. But yeah, I got there in the end. Scone it
is, not scone. That was one of my questions. And it was your husband you started
this with, I guess it was very important for you after he died to finish this
journey. Absolutely. I mean, it was definitely my idea and he kind of went along
with it. I think he was a bit baffled by it to start with, but he kind of he
went along and helped me out. And then he got really into it. And then yeah,
after he died, I just thought, you know, I've got to get this over the line and
do it for him. And that's what I've done. Lovely. Well, tell us about your
favourite scones along the way. The most memorable one for sure is a property in
York called Treasurer's House. They did a Christmas pudding scone with brandy
butter, which was just off the scale delicious. Yeah, never, never to be
forgotten. So that was one of my top ones. I had another fantastic one at the
White Cliffs of Dover Visitor Centre. That was amazing. Yeah, I mean, there's
been a hundred that scored five stars. So there's a lot of good ones to choose
from. Ah yes, you give them ratings on your blog, don't you? And there's a book
as well, a cookbook in collaboration with the National Trust. There was, the
National Trust came and said, yeah, we're producing a book of recipes. They had
gathered the recipes from their talented chefs around the country and they
wanted me to add some little stories and pieces from the blog to go along with
it. So that's what we did. And yeah, the National Trust book of scones has been
a massive success. There's a lot of appetite for scones out there. Don't get
bored with them? No, God no. How can you get bored with a scone? Never, never.
Fair enough. And I mean, what next? This is 10 years in the making. Do you have
another journey, another, well, another scone crawl that you could do somewhere
else? A scone crawl. Do you know what? I haven't, I'm ashamed to say. I've been
so focused on getting this finished. I haven't given it any thought. The
National Trust Scotland is actually a separate entity. So I might go and I'd
imagine that they'd be good at scones in Scotland. Yeah, Wales, Northern Ireland
and England. You've ticked all those boxes. Scotland to go next. Well, Sarah,
many thanks for joining us and congratulations again, Sarah Merker there. And
that is all for this edition of The World Tonight. For me, James Kimara-Sami and
the rest of the team, have a very good night. Studio Direction was by Jancis
Haycox. The editor was Bonnie Maboubian. Now, Mackenzie Crook stars in The Wrong
Stop from Italo Calvino's Marco Valdo, dramatised and narrated by Toby Jones.
Like many people reluctant to go straight home after work, finding it too
difficult and inhospitable, Marco Valdo's preferred refuge on a cold winter's
evening was the cinema. He had a particular passion for films in fabulous
technicolour, on the wide screen. Prairies, rocky mountains, equatorial forests,
tropical islands, where you can live with just a garland of flowers around your
head. Shh, please. It's just beginning. On one particularly cold winter's
evening, Marco Valdo had spent three or four absorbing hours transported across
the world to where a tragic romance had plunged him deep into the forests of
India, into dense jungle, pulsating with deadly insects and serpents. Good
night. Leaving the cinema, he made his way into the street, blinking open his
eyes to adjust. But something had changed. And when he opened his eyes, all he
could see was... All he could see was actually nothing. Absolutely nothing. Fog
had engulfed the city. Thick, opaque fog. Somewhat mechanically, Marco Valdo set
off for the number 30 tram stop. Sorry, sorry. The fog flattened distance into a
space without dimensions. It smudged the lights in the street into shapeless
glows, without any sense of... Oh, ouch!...place. But even when he banged his
nose against the tram stop, he noticed that he was actually happy. Without the
normal world around him, it was possible to hold onto the visions he'd just been
enjoying in the cinema. It was as if the city had pulled a cloud over itself,
like a blanket, muffling the cold and suspending Marco Valdo in a featureless
void. Ah, behold the splendour, the mighty Calicut Temple of Calcutta. A void he
could colour in for himself. Undisturbed at the back of the tram, he was free to
stare out into the empty night. The streets peopled by undefined luminous
presences, shadows looming in and out of the gloom. He was staring into a never-
ending movie on a frameless screen. Distracted by the magnificence of the Mughal
court, with its serried ranks of pirouetting ceremonial dancers, Marco Valdo
lost count of the stops until... Wait! Wait! Driver! He realised he was the only
passenger left on board. Next stop, driver! He tried to decipher the shadows
immediately surrounding him... Hello?...and the glimmers of light penetrating
the thick fog. But only one thing was clear. He'd got off at the wrong stop. He
was now alone, somewhere in the middle of nowhere. Hello? Hello there? Hello
there? Signore, please, where is this? Are we anywhere near Via Pancrazio
Pancrazietti? What's that? Right or left? It could have been either. So Marco
Valdo continued a bit further on, towards a glow emanating from the pavement
opposite, as he crossed what might have been a square with some grass in the
middle. But then, a different kind of luminous dot emerged from the gloom.
Hello? The luminous dot seemed to double and treble as it shifted position. Good
evening. But then, the light seemed to bloom and resolve itself into... an
entrance? Yes, an entrance to a tavern. Maybe it was the cigarette smoke, or the
fog penetrating the bar itself, but it was hard to see who, or what, lay inside.
Excuse me, gentlemen. I've been looking for... do you happen to know Via
Pancrazietti? Pancrazietti. You see, I got off at the wrong stop, taken the
wrong turning, and... Wrong stop? I'm not quite sure where the... There you are.
What's... oh, thank you. But I... Drink. Very kind, but I'm actually looking
for... Sit down for a moment. You're absolutely so gaily. Well... Yes, indeed!
The people of the tavern embraced Marco Valdo into their fold. It was quite the
most welcoming bar he'd ever visited. Do you happen to know Via Pancrazietti?
Yes, with very good health. Yes, good health to you. In fact, he was almost too
welcoming, so that every time he tried to establish where he was, or more
importantly, how to get to where he needed to return to... Pancrazielissime is
just a place, my friend, and places are elsewhere of humour. But we are here,
and now you are here with us, tonight of all nights, and on this night of...
Thank you....busy drinking and huge salutious... Oh, thank you. Yes. It was as
if the explanations he received were as foggy and blurred as the world outside.
And to warm himself up, he ordered another drink. Or rather, everyone he met
ordered drinks for him. Right, gents, same again? Yes, yes, let's have some. Oh,
no, no, I see. Come in, come in right. A quarter litre of wine. All right, long
life to you. And then another half litre. Yes, long life to you. It was as if
every slap on the back was accompanied by yet another drink in smaller and
smaller glasses. Who is he? Signor Pancrazietti. Who is he? That's what I'm
trying to find out. Eventually, Marco Valdo poured himself out onto the street
again. Good night. Good night. Good night. Not scarred. Be careful. Outside, the
fog was, if anything, thicker. But with the warmth of the wine inside him, Marco
Valdo stumbled onwards along the pavement, reaching out to feel for any wall
that might support him. After about 15 minutes in the cold, the mental fog
induced by the wine cleared enough for him to recall directions he'd been given
by one of the crowd. He'd been told to follow... He's head up this street here
towards the......for 100 yards. The problem was that he couldn't be sure how far
he'd already gone from the tavern. And now the space around him felt uninhabited
again. He thought he saw a marble street sign, but the adjacent lamppost didn't
reach high enough to cast any light on the name. So he decided to climb up the
post to get a closer look. But once he was up there, he still needed his matches
to illuminate the faded letters. And above the street sign, he could now see a
much bigger sign. Black letters on a white background. Access prohibited. A
narrow wall extended out in front of him. Partly illuminated by the adjacent
streetlights below, making a bright stripe in the midst of the darkness. He
climbed across and onto it, and continued on. Now he was able to make good
progress. He marched along the top of the wall as it took an irregular course,
complicated by niches, junctures and posts, shifting the angle of his route so
many times, he no longer knew in which direction he was headed, or indeed on
which side of the wall he should eventually jump off. Darkness. Fog. The
premonition that he might be swallowed into a void slowed his progress to a
tentative step, inching forward, until, from somewhere deep in what felt like a
bottomless chasm, tiny lights winked back up at him, as if from a great
distance. And now he noticed above him red and green lights, flashing on and
off, pulling him forward, until... I'm dead! But he wasn't dead. The earth had
reclaimed him, and he was able to crawl forward on grass, towards the tiny
lights he'd spotted from above. Now the lights beckoned him at eye level. He was
in a field. And then the ground hardened again. Tarmac. Tarmac illuminated from
above. Hello? Hello? Up ahead, the tarmac forked into different tracks, dotted
with twinkling lights. Hello? There was someone up ahead. A man. Waving,
dramatically. Yes! Hello? Hello? I'm looking for Viet Pancrazietty. But the
closer he got to the man, the clearer it became that he wasn't waving at Marco
Valdo. He was gesticulating at something else. Signore! The man's hands were
themselves flashing lights, and he was dressed in luminous clothing. Yellow
overalls. Good evening, signore. I'm afraid I'm lost. I got off at the wrong
stop earlier, and... Well, I've taken a wrong turning because of this dreadful
fog. Hello? You're lost? Yes. Yes, I am. The fog. Oh, there's nothing to worry
about. About a thousand meters, there is no fog. You can proceed safely. Thanks.
Where am I? You missed the entrance, that's all. The steps are just over there,
you see? Oh, don't worry, I'm sure they'll be waiting for you. Right. Right, OK.
The helpful man replaced his earphones, and Marco Valdo followed his
gesticulations... Bye!...towards the promise of other people. Thank you. Thanks
so much. Hello, signore. Hello there. Up here. Just come up the steps. Good
evening, signore. And please accept our apologies for any confusion we may have
caused. You'll be quite safe now, signore. Thanks. Actually, I wonder if you can
help me. We'd be happy to help. Again, I do apologise for your inconvenience.
But... Thank you. Please, do go through. My humble respects, signorina. This
fog, it's unbelievable. I quite understand. Please do take a seat now. I'll be
with you shortly. Good evening. Marco Valdo blinked as he adjusted to the sudden
impact of such bright light. Realising he had stumbled onto the most luxurious
bus he'd ever sat on, Marco Valdo was overcome with relief. Would you like
something to drink, sir? I'm sorry? A glass of something? Oh, please. And can I
ask you to fasten your seatbelt? Oh, yes, of course. Can I just say that this is
the most wonderful service? Thank you, sir. Do you know if there's a stop
anywhere near Via Pancrazio Pancrazietti? I'm sorry? What route do you take?
After Bombay? Sorry? To refuel, then Calcutta and Singapore. Singapore?
Seatbelt, please, sir. Yes, yes, of course. Marco Valdo looked around him. He
was seated next to an impassive Indian gentleman who was staring straight ahead.
But now he noticed other passengers dotted all over the place with beards and
turbans. There were also a few women wrapped in embroidered saris. And outside,
beyond the windows, emerging at some speed from the thick blanket of fog, Marco
Valdo could clearly see that the night was actually full of stars. And the plane
on which he was travelling was flying eastwards in a limpid sky of great
altitudes. In the morning on Radio 4, we explore homesicknesses as the astronaut
Tim Peake recalls what he longed for aboard the International Space Station.
That's at 11. Welcome to The Spark. We are making changes to the way BBC live
streams are distributed via third-party services and platforms, and the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds. Small acts of reaching out, small acts of
interrupting those thoughts could be life-saving. The Spark.