TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
...which has caused India's chief selector to resign. This is the BBC World
Service, the world's radio station. At two hours GMT, you're listening to the
newsroom from the BBC World Service. I'm Gareth Barlow, coming up. Earlier
today, the Department of Defense announced $2 billion in additional security
assistance. This package reaffirms the steadfast support of the United States
for Ukraine by committing additional unmanned aerial systems and electronic
warfare detection equipment. The US and the EU announced more support for
Ukraine and more sanctions against Moscow. But what impact will they have on the
war? Our Russia editor considers the implications. Also on the programme. This
is by far the biggest logistical operation Turkish forces have ever faced. The
fault line that they're having to cover is over 100 kilometres long. We take to
the air with the teams taking aid to Turkey and Syria following the deadly
earthquakes. And searches continue in Brazil following devastating rain and
mudslides. We'll have the latest details. This is the BBC. The announcement has
been delayed for several days by Poland, which had complained that the later
sanctions were too weak. Lithuania has also voiced reservations. The US, Canada
and Britain have imposed their own measures. In addition, leaders of the G7
group of richest economies have warned they'll punish any countries that help
Russia evade sanctions. But Western governments know that although 12 months of
sanctions have hit Russia's economy hard, they have not prevented it from
continuing its war in Ukraine. Restrictions on the movement of vehicles have
come into force in Nigeria, where elections begin in a few hours. Land borders
are shut. Soldiers have been patrolling key areas. And voting materials have
been delivered to some polling stations under armed guard. The legislative and
presidential elections come at a time of heightened security in Nigeria, with
insurgency in the northeast rising crime and shortages of cash and fuel. These
people at a market in Kano were stocking up on supplies. By tomorrow, we're
going to conduct the election because they don't know what is going to be out of
the election. So that is why you see everybody is trying to come and buy some
items. The number of people killed in the catastrophic earthquakes that hit
Turkey and northern Syria earlier this month has passed 50,000. Most of the
deaths were in Turkey. More than 100 of Israel's elite military reservists have
threatened to abandon their posts if the government goes ahead with
controversial plans to overhaul the judiciary. Officers and soldiers of the
Military Intelligence Special Operations Division issued the warning. Here's our
Middle East regional editor, Mike Thompson. Tens of thousands of protesters have
already voiced their anger against a judicial overhaul on Israel's streets. Now
the country's elite military reservists are pitching in too. The legal reforms,
currently going through parliament, would give Benjamin Netanyahu's government
total control of appointing judges. They would also end the power of the Supreme
Court to stop legislation it considers unconstitutional. Signatories to the open
letter, who include sergeants to brigadier generals, say the plans would destroy
democracy along with all they have fought for. Our Middle East regional editor,
Mike Thompson, with that latest report on the situation is Israel. Live from
London, you're listening to the latest world news from the BBC. Police in
Tunisia have arrested another critic of President Kice Syed. The latest to be
detained is a lawyer, Ghazi Shouashe, who previously led a political party. He
discovered that he was wanted by the authorities. When he went to see clients
who faced charges of conspiring against state security, more than a dozen
people, including politicians, two judges, and the head of an independent radio
station, have been detained this month. Earlier this week, Mr. Shouashe accused
Mr. Syed of presiding over injustice and failure in Tunisia. Floods and
landslides in southeastern Brazil are now known to have killed at least 54
people, with about 30 still missing. Most of those killed were in and around the
coastal town of São Sebastião in São Paulo State, where more than a month's
worth of rain fell in 24 hours last weekend. It's snowing in southern
California, with the Los Angeles area braced for its first blizzard since 1989.
Snowflakes of sleet swirled around the Hollywood sign in the mountains behind
Los Angeles. The main north-south highway, Interstate 5, was closed through the
Teon Pass, or grapevine. Forecasters were warned there could be flash flooding
and landslides on the coast. Antony Albanese will shortly become the first
serving Australian Prime Minister to march in the gay and lesbian Mardi Gras in
Sydney, one of the world's largest such events, but his presence has attracted
criticism, as Phil Mercer reports. Antony Albanese has attended Sydney's Mardi
Gras before as an opposition MP. But as a sitting Prime Minister, he's making
history by marching in one of the world's largest LGBTQI events that could
attract up to 300,000 spectators. He said he was committed to removing
inequality based on sexuality or identity. But critics insist Mr Albanese is
pandering to a small minority that's hijacking Australia's social agenda. BBC
News. The European Union has approved another round of sanctions against Russia.
They include measures against those spreading propaganda in support of Moscow.
Meanwhile, the US has also said it will provide Ukraine with more weaponry.
Here's the Pentagon Press Secretary, Air Force Brigadier General Patrick Ryder.
President Biden did participate in a meeting with the Group of Seven Leaders,
that's the group of the largest developed economies, and urged them to stand
strong in their support for Ukraine and to show that the US would not waver, as
he says. There was this announcement of new military aid, $2 billion worth.
Also, more sanctions, and this would target around 200 entities and individuals,
many of them tied to technology and military industries that are evading or
trying to evade existing sanctions in Russia, but also in other countries. And
the Treasury Department said this was the most significant trench of sanctions
yet. They've been very tough so far, but they haven't been as devastating as the
West expected. And that is partly due to a handful of countries, actually. So
you have China, which has continued to do business with Russia, but also others
like US allies such as Turkey and India have continued to do business. And
they're sort of an example of a middle ground of countries that don't support
the invasion, but they see it more as a European and American problem than a
global one, and they want to look after their own interests. A recent poll
showed that 48% of Americans support continuing to send weapons to Ukraine.
Shortly after the war started, that was 60%, so that number has dropped. Then
politically, you have the Republican Party divided. There is bipartisan support,
but there is an element on the right wing of the Republican Party that wants to
either stop or at least reduce the aid. Having said that, all the people who
signed the checks, so those are the leaders of the committees that matter, they
all do support continuing aid to Ukraine. Well, one development in the past few
hours, speaking to ABC News, President Biden has said he's ruling out for now
the request by Kiev to supply Ukraine with F-16 fighter jets. So then, one year
on, how is the invasion being viewed in Russia? It's a question I put to our
Russia editor, Steve Rosenberg. I was watching TV today here in Russia, and they
weren't focusing at all on the fact that it's one year since Vladimir Putin gave
the order for Russian troops to go into Ukraine. Obviously, they were reporting
on the situation there, but they weren't focusing on the anniversary. And I
think there's a good reason for that, because this special military operation,
as Putin still calls it, was supposed to have been done and dusted within days,
weeks maximum. It's now entering its second year. And over the first year, this
operation has resulted in very heavy Russian military casualties. Hundreds of
thousands of Russian citizens have had to be drafted into the army. It has been
quite a disaster for the Kremlin. Having said that, Vladimir Putin seems
determined to continue and seems to believe that he can secure victory. Whilst
the Russian population isn't really talking about the war, the West very much
is. The EU has announced a 10th round of sanctions. The US has announced more
military support, running to the billions, more sanctions as well. What impact
will they have on Moscow, on the president? You know, a year ago, when we saw
that tsunami of international sanctions being announced against Russia, many
people had predicted that a few months later, the Russian economy would
collapse. It hasn't. These sanctions haven't forced a Kremlin U-turn. And, you
know, if he had a dictionary on his desk in the Kremlin, I'm sure that you
wouldn't find the words de-escalation or off-ramp or defeat in there. He seems
determined to continue. He seems to believe either that, you know, he can secure
a victory, or perhaps he thinks that he's in it so deep now that he doesn't see
a way back for him. He's telling the nation, really, get used to this situation.
Steve Rosenberg there. Well, on the ground in Ukraine, one of Russia's key
targets has been the strategic eastern town of Volodai. The latest attempt by
Russian forces to take it early this month ended in a humiliating defeat. Our
senior international correspondent, Ola Geren, has gone there. We're making our
way now towards the front line with Ukrainian troops passing by apartment block
after apartment block that are completely destroyed. Some of them have had the
front torn away. They're blackened. One in front has a huge hole punched
through. It looks like it was hit by a missile and this is just one destroyed
town on Ukraine's very long front line. We've just been told to duck down here
now and take cover at the wall. The troops have heard something, possibly a
Russian drone. The front line is about 500 meters away. They say Russian troops
are trying to advance, but they're holding them back. How heavy is the fighting
around the city now? It's difficult, says the commander, whose code name is
Beast. People are on their feet for 20 hours. The fighting goes on around the
clock. I can't say more. It's secret. People have gathered around now, mainly
elderly people, wrapped up in winter coats and they're queuing now to get some
bread. We meet Valentina, a small figure bent low over her walking stick. She's
73 and says she has nowhere else to go. We are frightened, of course, but what
can we do? We live with it. We can't say don't shoot. They have their job. We
have our lives. We see a Ukrainian mortar team dart into position and target the
enemy nearby. One year on, the Russians aren't winning here, but they aren't
giving up either. They still hold almost a fifth of Ukraine. That report by Ola
Gerin. You're listening to the newsroom from the BBC World Service. Let's take a
look now at some of the day's other stories. Voters in Africa's most populous
country, Nigeria, are heading to the polls later to select their next leader.
The outgoing president, Mohammadu Buhari, is stepping down after nearly eight
years in power. His successor will inherit a country beset by worsening
insecurity and economic hardship. A total of 18 candidates are campaigning for
the top job, but a ping and polls indicate that there are only really three that
have a realistic chance of trying to turn the country around. Bolotinobu of the
governing APC, Atiku Abibaka of the main opposition, PDP and Peter Obie of the
Labour Party, who has the support of Nigeria's youth, are all seen as potential
winners of one of the most unpredictable elections in recent times. And it's the
first time since the end of military rule in 1999 that the dominant two-party
system is facing a real challenge. The run-up has been marred by violence, but
the Electoral Commission president, Mahmoud Yaqubu, says he's confident the poll
will happen smoothly. Generally speaking, the situation nationwide has come as
far as our preparations are concerned. There has been no incident involving the
personnel or huge quantities of materials deployed by the Commission. Voter
enthusiasm is high, and so too is our determination to conduct credible
elections. More than 200 million people live in Nigeria, and around 87 million
are eligible to vote, and that's a record number, as the BBC's Manny Jones
reports from Lagos. Obviously, the numbers are higher than ever because of the
rising population, but the percentage of people that have collected their
voter's card is the highest that we've seen since the country transition to
democracy 24 years ago. And I think that what that tells you is that there's
real engagement in these elections. We've talked throughout the campaign about
how this is the first time that we've had three main contenders for the post of
president. And I think that what that's done is it seems to have motivated a lot
of people to get involved in this election. I think it's also because of the
state that the country is in now, right? We're going through an economic crisis.
Inflation is at 21 percent. Food inflation is even higher. Unemployment is at 33
percent. So lots of people feeling the pinch. And then also insecurity is
another major issue that's affecting people's day-to-day lives. And I think that
all of, seeing all of these problems has made a lot of Nigerians want to make a
change, want to see a difference. It seems that lots of people have gone above
and beyond to get their voter's card this time around. Things in Lagos are
actually surprisingly quiet. And I think it's because a lot of people have been
traveling back to their homesteads for voting. You can only vote in Nigeria
where you registered to vote. And for a lot of people, that's where they're from
originally, their home states. There were concerns with the current cash crisis,
which some of your listeners might be aware of. There's an acute shortage of
cash in Nigeria at the moment because the currency has been redesigned and not
enough new bills have been printed. So there were concerns that because of this
shortage of cash, lots of people might not be able to travel. But certainly
traffic seems a lot lighter, which would suggest that people have already
started heading back. Marni Jones there. And just one note in addition to that
is on our website at bbc.com slash news, the story of a Nigerian politician
arrested for alleged money laundering on the eve of the election. That's because
they had half a million US dollars in cash in their car. Read the rest of it for
yourself online. BBC dot com slash news. Now more than 50,000 people are known
to have died in the earthquakes which struck Turkey and Syria at the start of
February. International aid is now flowing into the region as charities add to
the support already provided by governments from around the world. Many
survivors complained though that aid and rescue efforts were too slow,
especially in Syria. Thousands were left freezing on the streets without
shelter. Our correspondent in Turkey, Laura Bicker, has been to look at the
challenges of getting help to those who need it. Aid that took time to arrive is
now in full flow. Tents, food, medicine are all passed along a line of soldiers
and volunteers then crammed on board flight after flight. More than 100 aircraft
leave here every day. Our helicopter is stacked full before we take off over the
mountains to get an idea of the scale of this disaster. This is by far the
biggest logistical operation Turkish forces have ever faced. The fault line that
they're having to cover is over 100 kilometres long. Ten cities are in a state
of emergency and then there are remote communities scattered across the mountain
and the biggest thing people need right now are these tents and it takes up a
bit of room in a helicopter. On the southern coast, in the hillside village of
Kabsuyu, they've waited for more than two weeks for tents. Hamza Sevartura's
shelters have finally arrived after yet another big tremor on Monday. Our water
is disconnected. We have no electricity. Our situation is dire. We can't
communicate. Our phones have no signal inside the village. We don't know what's
next. Will they build houses? Will they demolish our homes? Will they take us
elsewhere? We don't know what we will do. Gonal shows us around her house. It's
still standing, just. But the cracked concrete means the roof over her bedroom
is at an angle. It's not safe. We live in fear. We can't sleep well at night.
When the quake happens, we suddenly wake up. What can we do? We can't go outside
either. It's cold. There's nothing that can be done. Her daughter was killed
when the first earthquake struck the city of Antakya on February the 6th.
They've buried her here in the village. The tents are temporary. Aid is now
getting to most who need it but this operation is a short-term fix. The long-
term plan to help the tens of thousands of people left homeless in this crisis
is still unclear. Laura Bicker there. Let's move now to Brazil because search
and rescue operations are continuing in the southeast of the country after
record levels of torrential rain caused severe flooding and deadly landslides
around the beach town of São Sebastião in São Paulo state. At least 54 people
have been killed in hillside communities and a further 30 are still missing.
Wendy Urquhart reports. Torrential rain has been battering southeastern Brazil
for more than a week, sending rivers of mud down hillsides. Homes perching
precariously on the slopes didn't stand a chance. One thousand rescue workers,
50 vehicles, 14 helicopters and 53 engineering teams were deployed to disaster
areas in São Paulo state to help find survivors. They've managed to pull dozens
out of the mud but many more didn't make it. Valdemar, who's a resident of São
Sebastião, is haunted by the fading cries of his mother. All my houses were
broken down. The broken tiles and shingles fell on us, leaving us injured.
Everyone was frightened. I called out to my mother hoping she would answer, but
all I heard were three cries from her and nothing else. At that moment, I knew
that she was taken away from us forever. Nearly 2,000 people were forced to
evacuate their homes temporarily and some 760 are now homeless. President Luis
Inátheo Lula da Silva flew over the disaster area earlier this week and
reiterated the dangers of building in high-risk areas, but his words are
unlikely to make a difference. At least 9.5 million people have built flimsy
homes on the hillsides of Brazil. Most of them are in areas that are at high
risk of flooding or landslides. That report by Wendy Urquhart. Now let's turn
our attention to the world of sport. Paul Sarris joins us and Paul let's start
with the cricket. It was a historic day for South Africa. Yes, Gareth, indeed
so. South Africa have reached their first ever World Cup final in the sport,
men's or women's, after they beat England in the semifinal of the women's T20
tournaments on home soil. England were big favourites, having won four from four
while the Proteus were beaten in the opening match of the tournament by Sri
Lanka. Laura Vulfard scored 55 for the hosts who will face Australia in the
final on Sunday. It's incredible and to do it at my home ground just makes it so
much more special. In that game, we couldn't even chase 130 and now we put up
165 today. So I don't know, I think it's just performing when we need to,
peaking at the right time. I think we did well to not let that sort of get our
tournament down and kept with the momentum and hopefully we're peaking at the
right time now. The England skipper Heather Knight said she was proud of her
science performance despite the result. I think first of all what a brilliant
game of cricket. We fought really well at the end, I think to take it as close
as we did but I think probably in hindsight we let them get a few too many. I
think South Africa were very good with the ball. They had a very clear, simple
plan. The ball straight took pace off and made it tricky for us. The voice there
of the England skipper Heather Knight. Well, Paul, a historic day for South
Africa and one for South Sudan too. Tell us about that. Yes, they beat Senegal
83-75 in a qualifier in Egypt on Friday to reach the Basketball World Cup for
the very first time. The former NBA star Luol Deng, who was born in what is now
South Sudan but fled as a child, eventually settling here in the UK and
representing Great Britain. He returned to the country to set up and lead the
Basketball Association. The first international took place just six years ago
and now they've sealed their spots at the tournaments in Japan, the Philippines
and Indonesia later this year. Great story. And Paul, indeed. And Paul, I'm
particularly excited this weekend because of the rugby. It's a busy weekend of
sport ahead, isn't it? Huge, huge weekend of sport Gareth. Yes, Six Nations
Rugby returns Ireland in Rome to take on Italy before England play Wales in
Cardiff. Big weekend in the Premier League and the League Cup Final on Sunday
too. Manchester United taking on Newcastle United at Wembley Stadium. We'll
follow the action closely. Paul Seras for a moment. Thank you. Now, David Harper
has some of the other stories we're following today. Yes, and Ukraine has
launched a postage stamp based on a mural by the British graffiti artist Banksy
to mark the anniversary of Russia's invasion of the country. The stamp shows a
grown man who looks like the Russian president Vladimir Putin being thrown to
the ground in a judo match with a small boy. The secretive artist confirmed in
November that he had painted several murals in bombed out parts of Ukraine.
3,000 tickets for the Eurovision Song Contest in May are to be made available to
Ukrainians living in the UK. The event will take place in Liverpool which will
host it on behalf of Ukraine who won last year. The UK government has announced
nearly 12 million dollars in funding to cover operational costs and to ensure
the contest truly showcases Ukrainian culture. And police in the US state of
Massachusetts have issued an arrest warrant for a man who allegedly set up a
secret cryptocurrency mining operation in a space under the floor of a school
where he used to work. Nadim Nahas is accused of stealing 18,000 dollars of
electricity to power 11 computers at the school in the town of Kohassid. Crypto
mining is the process that creates digital currencies like Bitcoin. David, thank
you. Now as the saying goes an elephant never forgets but how do you go about
testing that in practice? Well, a scientist from Germany has found an ingenious
way of doing so by seeing how elephants react to smelling their relatives dung.
Nick Miles spoke to the co-author of the study, Franziska Höhne, from the
University of Wuppertal. I went around the whole of Germany with a lot of
elephant poo and I presented it to different elephants so I had three different
samples for each of the elephants. I had a sample of an elephant that they were
totally familiar with, a member of their herd for example and then I had a
sample of a stranger, so an elephant that they had never ever met and didn't
know at all. And then I always had a sample of a relative that they were living
separate from. So it was either the sample of a mother or a daughter. We had the
idea that they would probably react more intense to the sample of the separate
living relative and it turned out they actually did. So how did they react? With
the important samples of the relatives they showed a wide branch of behavior so
they colored which is sound they can express, which is very intense I would say,
and they paced backwards, they started flapping the ears and lifting the head,
tail, trunk. They also started defecating and some of them even started running
around the whole enclosure. The signs that we saw all taken in one showed that
it was excitement and mostly positive excitement. So to what extent did this fit
with what you were expected to find? Elephants are known for their long-term
memory right, but there's just no real proof for this. We expected them to react
in a certain way but I have to admit I myself was really surprised how intense
the reaction in the end was. Do we know how long it had been since they'd seen
their relatives? So we had two mother-daughter parents and one of them hadn't
seen each other in two years and the other in 12 years, so quite a long time. 12
years and yet this reaction was pretty extreme. They showed us that they still
remember the scent and that they don't forget their relatives, which is known
for them also in the wild. They never forget the family bonds they have, but I
often ask myself the question would I remember the scent of my mother or my
sister after 12 years not smelling her? I'm not sure about it, I hope so, but we
know that the elephants do. I'm pretty glad I've got memory recall for faces
instead of poop. Anyway that's it for this edition of the Newsroom programme,
thanks for listening, there's more details on all our stories online at
bbc.com.com. This is the BBC World Service with the winner of the English as a
Second Language prize for the International Radio Playwriting Competition. My
name is Aynoor Karim, I'm a writer from Kazakhstan and my play. It's a funny
story about a student who finds someone else's passport and wants to give it
back to its owner. I thought I'd better take it to the police station myself,
it's on my way. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, show me the passport. At first I
felt a little bit like I was limited in the way how I can express myself, but
then I like it even more because you close your eyes and you just need to
imagine. Uslan Adarov, not a Kazakh? Why isn't the nationality stated in that
passport? Why do you say he's not a Kazakh? He is a Kazakh, absolutely. I would
be happy if people just laugh and enjoy it. The man lost his passport, must give
it back. Oh, what a face. The passport, today at 19 GMT. Coming up on Stumped
with me, Alison Mitchell. The wheels have come off for Australia's men in India.
It's taken just six days of cricket for India to retain the border gavasca
trophy. So, where did it all go wrong for the Aussies? Plus the sting operation,
which has caused India's chief selector to resign. And we'll hear about the Dawn
Till Dusk tournament, which has given Pakistani women the opportunity to play
cricket. That's all on Stumped after the latest from BBC News. BBC News with
David Harper. The United States and the European Union have imposed further
sanctions on Russia a year after the invasion of Ukraine began. Canada and
Britain have also announced more restrictions and G7 leaders say they'll punish
any countries that help Russia evade sanctions. Travel restrictions are in force
in Nigeria ahead of presidential elections, seen as the most unpredictable in
years. There are controls on the movement of vehicles, land borders are shut and
soldiers have been patrolling key areas. The number of people killed by this
month's catastrophic earthquakes in Turkey and northern Syria has risen above
50,000. Civil defence workers in Syria have called for more international help
for injured children. Members of Israel's elite military reservists have
threatened to abandon their posts if the government goes ahead with the planned
overhaul of the legal system. They said the changes would destroy democracy.
Anthony Albanese will shortly become the first serving Australian Prime Minister
to march in the gay and lesbian Mardi Gras in Sydney, one of the world's largest
such events. Mr Albanese says he's committed to removing inequality and
celebrating diversity. Suspected gang members in El Salvador have been moved to
a huge new prison as part of what President Bukele calls a war on crime. Large
numbers of people have been rounded up under a state of emergency. Emergency
teams in southeastern Brazil are searching for survivors of floods and
landslides which have killed more than 50 people. Most were in and around a
coastal town in Sao Paulo State. President Biden has defended his
administration's response to a train derailment in Ohio which caused a chemical
spill and the evacuation of the town of East Palestine. Mr Biden has been
criticised for not visiting the site. Los Angeles is braced for its first
blizzard in more than 30 years. Snow is already falling in some areas. The main
north-south highway, Interstate 5, was closed through the Tohon Pass. And that's
the latest BBC News. From the BBC World Service in association with ABC and All
India Radio, this is Stumped. Hello and welcome to Stumped, your
intercontinental hit of news features and debate from the quirky world of
cricket. I'm Arson Mitchell coming to you from my hotel room in Wellington in
New Zealand, officially the windiest city in the world because of its position
right on the edge of the Cook Strait so the wind just gets funneled between the
north and the south island. But I've come here from Mount Maunganui in the north
where we saw Bazball in all its finery only surpassed by Stuart Broad's own
fiery spell with the brawl which meant him and James Anderson have become the
most successful pair of bowlers in test history in terms of taking wickets when
they play in a test side together. They pass the record of the great Glenn
McGrath and the late Shane Warns. That really has been something. And also I'm
very pleased in this hotel because the television in the lobby, it seems to be
permanently fixed to the Women's T20 World Cup which is at semi-finals stage.
England, Australia, India and South Africa are all in the semi so wait to see
who gets through to the final this week. Jim Maxwell in Sydney at home here
looking out on a lovely evening here in where somewhere in Nino or Nenya,
whatever it's called, we keep getting high winds rain and a bit of sunshine and
we certainly have a bit to think about in terms of our men's cricket team so we
won't bother. We'll just talk about the women's team because Alissa Healy's
fitting and raring to go and I think the whole concentration of Australia at the
moment is perhaps more on that what happens in South Africa than India where
well mercifully we've got a few days off before the next test match. Yes indeed
you do. I am Sareel Gupta for All India Radio. I will not talk about the test
matches right now there's enough time for that but the big news really has been
the Ranji Trophy where the final was won by Saurashtra. It's a state in the west
of India without its two big stars Jadaja and Pujara who were playing in the
test match and this is about I think the second time in three years that they've
won. Bengal hasn't won now they've lost the last couple that they played in the
last time I think they won. The Ranji Trophy was about 70 or 80 years ago and
they had a very good chance this time but it just shows the depth of talent and
Indian cricket that you can have a team that is let's say semi-unheralded
meeting the big teams and all the big teams like Mumbai and Karnataka and Delhi
all of them faded by the wayside and a team like Saurashtra twice in three years
to win India's premier domestic tournament. And of course we are going to start
this week by talking about the men's test series between India and Australia
because India have already retained the border gavasca trophy in the test
series. It only took them six days so India lead the four test series 2-0 and
Australia's nightmare in Nagpur was swiftly followed by dismal in Delhi and
neither test match reached the fourth day. Australia managed just 268 runs
across their two innings in the first test rolled for 91 in the second innings
then they were undone in arguably even more spectacular fashion by Ravindra
Jadajah and Ravichandra and Ashwin in the second test just when he thought the
match was going to be competitive the Aussies collapsed in their second innings
again this time losing their last eight wickets for just 28 runs and Jadajah
with that career best seven for 42. Now it's led Jim to criticism from a lot of
former Australia players who've been questioning the leadership, the
preparation, the selection. So where for you has it gone so spectacularly wrong?
Well I think the inability to make runs against very good Indian bowling and I
think this has cursed Australia for much of the last 10 or 15 years whether it
be in India or Sri Lanka we've had similar problems against anyone who can turn
the doorknob as it were bowling left or right handed and this time it's the two
Ravi's who have done the damage and the the two words that come to mind
perennially when you look at the Australia's demise swept away they swept
themselves away it was almost impossible to think of an Indian batsman in this
game playing more than the occasional cross-battered sweep shot and yet
Australia from the moment Steve Smith got out LBW to Ashwin they're all over the
place right it just was like a plague like a disease like a flu running through
the side it was just a blur of panic stricken cross-battered shots the captain's
probably one of the worst because it was so premeditated I'm not sure what
Australia does from here as far as this tour is concerned for most of us it's
all over whatever happens from here if miraculously Australia win two tests
that'll be the greatest get out of all time I can't see it. So Sunil plenty of
woes for Australia but what about the credit for India and the way they are
playing and continue to be dominant once again at home? Yeah you know I was
thinking about what I should say I don't want to crow because I actually am
disappointed and disappointed in the lack of fight right the evening of day two
in Delhi after Travis head went after the bowling and they reached 69 or
something for one I said wow you know we got a game on our hands and India is
going to have a tough time chasing on the fourth you know the fourth innings on
the third day or fourth day maybe look what happened to India and Bangladesh we
almost lost that second test we were 45 for six or something before again Ashwin
rescued the cause but I just like to point back to you know when India used to
travel to Australia I'm talking about the 70s and the 80s it was virtually the
thing in reverse to the quicks over there because we weren't used to the bounce
we weren't used to the swing we weren't used to the pace and it was the same
thing we didn't have the defenses to cope with that type of bowling and that's
why we were being swept away I'm not swept away we were being nicked away
literally nicked or bowled that's what used to happen to us Brett Leaf his debut
test five for 42 against India so that's you know in the universe what's
happening here in India and I was horrified when I looked at day three
everybody's just sweeping like India used to go there and flash outside the off
stump it's exactly the same thing what I'd like to point out is that if you look
at the last five test matches against Australia India won four in two very
different conditions India bounced back from 36 all out in Adelaide right to win
the Melbourne test to draw the Sydney test and then to win at the gabber which
was of course the fortress for Australia so it's a question of the mind I always
believe sport you have talent you have technique but eventually it is
temperament. Well Sano you mentioned you mentioned out different conditions and
of course there will be a world test championship final in England in June and
of course you know there's plenty to play for for both these sides in terms of
still getting to that world test championship final India Australia Sri Lanka
are the only other side that that could make it. Australia need to draw one of
the last two tests to secure a place India a second in the table and they'll be
assured of a place in the fun if they win the series 3-1 or better. So are you
confident Sano from the Indian point of view that they will be there in England
and that will you know sort of test them again in a slightly different way. It
will test them and I'm already booking my tickets my daughter's going to be
joining me from Toronto and we're going to be at the oval in June to watch that
world test championship final whoever's going to be there I think we would have
learned against playing New Zealand last year that was at the Rose Bowl and we
made the wrong team selection by having two spinners I think we would have
learned from that and as I said the test series is over and I'm booking my
tickets I'll be there in June. Jim I think you'll be there won't you because
you're going out for the Ashes you're going to make sure you're there for a week
a week earlier for the world test championship more importantly are Australia
going to be playing in it. Oh I would like to think so but let's wait for the
next couple of games to pass before we can tick that box but it certainly looks
like it at the moment but yes be nice to get out of this series with a bit of
respect restored for their reputations because it's becoming more and more
apparent as I say that Australia a bit like India they can win at home but
winning away well India struggled to do that too at times. Can they win in
England Jim looking further ahead? Well I haven't done it since 2001 have they
and England seemed to be on some kind of resurgence at the moment so yes it's
all very fascinating to think about who's going to play and how well are they
going to play but at the moment you'd have to say that England are number one on
current form because they've got so much confidence and they're heading towards
what their eighth straight victory if they can pull it off in Wellington. Yep
and it is extraordinary watching this England side in close quarters as I am
here in New Zealand and what was particularly fascinating is that England taking
on a New Zealand side who have already encountered them playing this newfound
all-out attacking style cricket they came off the wrong end in England last
summer and they've come off at the wrong end again in Mount Monganui and we even
saw Neil Wagner who so often is able to control a run rate by banging the ball
in short well he was just getting hooked merrily to the boundary repeatedly he
had a hundred runs against his name in the wrong column after just 11 overs of
his bowling and we had Ford and Anderson playing together again well they will
be playing together again in Wellington where it all started for them 15 years
ago I mentioned at the top of the show about them breaking that record and it
got a I mean I think come the ashes I mean Broad Anderson Robinson is England's
strongest attack yes you can always add the extra pace of Mark Wood you've got
Archer and Olly Stone sort of in the in the ranks as well but I think those
three are becoming as formidable a trio as anything Australia puts together with
Stark Cummins and a fit Hazelwood or you know Stark Cummins and Scott Boland as
it's been recently and particularly in English conditions so you know I think as
well some of the Australians are going to have been away a long long time by the
time they get to England because there's an in India tour some of them and
staying on for well there's one day is then the IPL and then possibly this world
test championship final and then into the ashes so a lot will also be about just
how fit and fresh the Aussies can stay coming into the Ashes series as well but
you're absolutely right Jim it is a fascinating time in the test game right now
well if you've missed anything from Stunt you can download and subscribe to the
podcast via your usual podcast provider and you can go to YouTube and watch the
show there as well head to the BBC World Services YouTube channel on last week's
show we discussed the inaugural auction for the Women's Premier League a number
of players will receive life-changing amounts of money as a result of playing in
the new Indian League so how should they manage that money well we invited
finance expert Ben Gibson onto the show to tell us I think the bigger picture is
is trying to get them to understand the value of that money and how although one
year might be great how there is no guarantees around that being paid out to
them for the for the rest of their careers we don't know what will happen in
terms of performance and that's the biggest hurdle I think you have to get over
when working with athletes so the type of work that we do is very educational
really so yes we will help them position their money in the most secure way that
fits their circumstances but ultimately we're trying to give them a pot of money
that they can call upon when when they're old enough to to sort of think about
life beyond sport from the BBC World Service this is Stumped on ABC and All
India Radio next on Stumped the sting operation that's led to one of Indian
cricket's most influential men resigning Chitan Sharma's second stint as the
chair of India men's selection committee is over after just 41 days he handed in
his resignation after being caught on camera making all sorts of allegations
about the men's national team now Sunil this has been labeled as a sting
operation by a local TV team so just run us through exactly what's happened the
TV channel called ZTV released footage which showed him talking obviously it was
uh he was doing it in confidence but it was being recorded as a quote unquote
sting relating to matters really of the Indian men's cricket teams and whatever
I say now I must reiterate is is still in the realm of allegations though of
course as we all know that he has resigned in that video he alleged that Virat
Kohli the former captain of the Indian team had ego clashes with former BCCI
president Saurav Ganguly he said Mr Kohli had falsely claimed that he'd been
removed from the ODI captaincy without any communication from the governing body
and that was in the media and that's what Kohli claimed we all know that he's
also alleged I keep repeating that word that some players take and this is
serious injections to speed up their recovery after injuries and play even when
not match fit and Mr Sharma has not been available for public comment since that
footage appeared that he has resigned now obviously there has been media
coverage and some social media ranting uh which normally happened in a case like
this uh but then it was I think the best thing that happened to it or to him was
that the Australian test series was on right so it was that big news that
covered up this particular bit of news and frankly if you ask me the paying
public is not really concerned with whom the selection committee is I don't
think they know half of it because most of them are you know people who've
played say three or four test matches or you know a few ODI's and that is the
criteria for them being eligible for getting out of the selection committee so I
the key thing was some of the allegations he made about Kohli and there were a
couple of people in the Delhi test match who held up placards supporting Kohli
because he is of course is you know a local boy and obviously people have gotten
on to the fact that he was being implicated by saying he said the wrong thing so
I think there's a lot of sympathy for the cricketers I don't think there's too
much sympathy for the selection committee are some of these allegations
particularly about the injections are any of these going to be investigated to
your knowledge do we know that not to my knowledge I don't think that there's
anything that's come out in the media Jim what are your thoughts on the story
and and indeed how it's come about in this operation this sting operation well
that's that's probably poor practice in the way it was sneakily done but you'd
have to say this is a very bad air of judgment on the part of its head and
shaman to be sprouting it in Australia or in England there may have been bigger
headlines even with the England team or the Australian team winning so
comfortably on the playing field yeah obviously he didn't know there was a
camera around but I mean sting operations do have their place don't know if you
think of the biggest sting in world cricket the spot fixing scandal of 2010 that
was something which exposed criminal activity and players were sent to jail as a
result this is somebody in a senior position being loose and in discreet and
making allegations or maybe believing he was speaking to a reporter off the
record and not intending anything to be reported but of course without being
privy to the exact circumstances you know we're only speculating about that and
one thing is for sure though isn't it that when private views are aired publicly
like this well then a position of responsibility such as Chet and Shama is in
certainly becomes untenable and and that is exactly why he tended his
resignation stumped on the BBC World Service finally on stumped Pakistan might
not have made it out of the group stage of the women's t20 world cup in South
Africa but back home an initiative to encourage more girls and women to play the
sport or it's flourishing Pakistan's a nation where chances for women to play
sport can sometimes be limited but Sunil you've been finding out about Kalo
cricket which is literally making a difference overnight tell us more oh yes I
was privileged earlier this week to speak to Hadil Obed a lady who's the founder
of Kalo cricket which literally means play cricket Kalo means play and it
started off as a website to cover men's grassroots game you know the ones that
they play with the tape ball and with the hard ball but in in the in the gullies
and in the village greens as it were but it then turned into something much
greater because they now organize cricket matches and tournaments for men and
women which are mainly played and this is the most interesting thing at night in
Pakistan so I asked Hadil how she came up with the idea to revolutionize the
women's grassroots game in Pakistan how that idea occurred and what she's done
to actually propagate it so to be very fair with you I'll be honest I stumbled
upon women's cricket in Pakistan so we started Kalo cricket with the idea that
we wanted to do something for those who love to play cricket on a grassroots
level now whether it was that you wanted to be the next Sanamir or the next
Shahid al-Fridi or whatever it is that you wanted to do whether it was to be
part of the national team or to play as a weekend outlet we wanted to give you
the opportunity and a platform to kind of have your voice heard have your
statistics speak for themselves highlight your key moments and kind of celebrate
the game itself and your love for cricket so it was it was the ramsan of 2016
and every nook and cranny of Karachi had men's cricket happening and you know
you have tape all on the streets and ramsan is like traditionally a very festive
cricket kind of a month which is funny because I don't know why it is that way
but I think it's because people essentially stay up all night you know playing
cricket and then everybody is what it used to be in the day and so you know it
was just this general understanding of okay there's so many men playing cricket
what's happening for the women and we found that there was actually no women's
night tape or tournament happening not just in Karachi but in Pakistan and it
was kind of like an understood thing that like no the men play cricket at night
and the women you know are mostly at home or they're spectators so we kind of
wanted to change that a little bit and we didn't know what we would expect like
we did not know you know would there be backlash we did not know if will five
girls turn up will 50 girls turn up you know will there even be a tournament
worthy of you know playing and so we just kind of like put a feeler out and like
within 24 hours we had an absurd amount of you know registrations and people
calling and saying oh my god something this has never happened before like you
know we want to play we had parents calling because of course it's a women's
cricket tournament and so it was parents kind of calling and asking that like is
this legitimate can we send our daughters is it safe you know it's night it's
from dusk till dawn and so that's kind of how we stumbled upon it and the
response was so overwhelming that we realized we'd actually found something that
was absolutely incredible and we wanted to be able to do something and give back
to the sport. So when you started this sorry I read that you'd started it only
with men's cricket till you brought in the women's cricket back in 2016 if I
remember did you face backlash we normally think about a societal backlash did
you find any resistance from the boys who were playing at night saying hey
you're taking over a piece of art of you know how are you giving it to the girls
but did that ever come up? You know it's never come up and I have to say I'm so
proud of the boys because when my first women's cricket tournament happened I
got a lot of backlash from say like religious communities we got a lot of hate
on like you know social media and we had to consistently keep blocking. I made
sure that the security at the grounds and all was very good because we were
afraid of somebody coming in and shutting down our tournament and it happened
not just the first year but the second year as well we were blocking comments
about like the second because we were like what is happening but the boys
actually who came in to watch the cricket the guys who were commenting on our
social media and because we live streamed all our matches we're like seeing the
videos and writing on the pictures and doing all of them they were really
supportive. I had so many fathers be so excited because I remember this
particular dad on the first one like sitting with the team at Kanadu Mi team
Huddle and he came to me and he was like you know I never got to make even the
Pakistan 18 but I'm going to make sure my daughter who's 13 she gets to the
Pakistan level and there was like just a general sense of like finally finally
you know even the girls get to play and it's been so interesting because I
wasn't expecting that. If girls who've been playing in your leagues and in your
tournaments of course I read about Fatima Sana if a couple of them come out and
actually start making that difference in the senior team right and that senior
team you know not winning but even getting the semi-finals you know doing
something like that in the tournaments and that or making it to for instance the
the women's big bash league is that is that something that you foresee happening
with some of the girls who are playing with you. I'm hoping to make Kayla
Cricket's movement across Pakistan so that it becomes a nursery almost whereby
you know you've created a platform for women cricketers and then the Pakistan
cricket board can come in and look at the stats look at you know the women
cricketers be a part of our tournaments in a sense and say you know this is the
talent worth identifying investing in the most basic grassroots level needs to
be taken more seriously and that's kind of what we're hoping for from 2023 to
2025. We want to not just double we want to like at least I'm talking about four
tournaments this year but I would at least love to have eight. I would love to
do it in different parts. I would love to kind of have consistently keep getting
in the statistics and you know tape poll for women isn't taken that seriously
and I don't understand it because you know so many of our men cricketers have
come through tape and you know and so for me I'm like this is crazy just because
she can't play hardball cricket doesn't mean she can't be taught to play
hardball cricket as long as you're seeing the talent in tape ball and I think
you know of course the PCB you know is an organization that has been working
towards the development of women's cricket however they also have their
limitations and their resources and I think that's kind of why I've been so
passionate about Kayla Kavathin initiative which is all about you know women
playing cricket is because I think if we strengthen the baseline you'll actually
see it move upward and we'll actually be able to see that I'm not saying our
women cricket team will win a world cup even in the next 10 years but I'm saying
you won't be losing by 114 runs to England either you know so there and you will
see a vast improvement. One question that I have for you is that you know in our
part of the world the entire subcontinent it's cricket it is cricket that drives
everybody's imaginations but there are other sports you intend branching out
into Kayla Pakistan instead of just Kayla cricket. You know so I've been asked
that quite a bit in terms of like so people have come up to me like a lot of
footballers have come up to me and said why aren't you doing like you know
football I had a few volleyball players come and ask me that you know why is
there no like Kayla volleyball so my short answer is that my love is for cricket
and I am like I've always been an avid fan then I was like a cricket writer in
the middle for a different while and then like I started Kayla cricket and I had
like immense love for it and you know cricket's always been the one thing the
reason why I started Kayla cricket is because I always felt like cricket heals
everything in this country and no matter how bad things are going personally or
or in the country itself cricket was the one thing that you know just healed you
and so I wanted to give back to the sport that had given me so much and that's
kind of why I had started Kayla cricket. I've never played cricket and that's
the funny part is that I've actually never played it I loved it I followed it I
am I'm on the ground once in a while I've picked up a battle ball but I've
actually never played cricket in any capacity so you know a lot of people have
asked me that like why don't you play and I said because I didn't grow up
playing it it was never really a thing you know like you played with your
cousins like in the garden for like half an hour but that was like the extent of
it having said that I do understand the impact of sport and I do understand the
love for it and I do follow other sports and what I love about it is the sense
of community and I think that's why so many people love sports it makes you feel
like you belong to something and that you all share an equal passion for it.
Well that was a fabulous interview indeed sports give so many people a sense of
belonging whether that's at community level or higher it really really runs
deep. So Sunil that's a lovely chat thank you Hadil Abaid the founder of Kalo
Cricket. That is all for this week's Stumped so I'll say thanks to Jim Maxwell
and to Sunil Gupta and of course to all of you for listening make sure you join
us again same time next week bye-bye. Stumped is a BBC sport production for the
BBC World Service in association with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation
and All India Radio. This is the BBC World Service and on the food chain this
week. High-end food doesn't always come out of high-end kitchens. In fact
there's a culinary world where Michelin-style meals are produced with the bare
minimum of cooking facilities cobbled together in unlikely places. I'm Marie
Keyworth uncovering the hidden world of high-end mass catering. The food chain
at bbcworldservice.com food chain. In 50 minutes witness history. With me
Josephine McDermott. Today we're going back to the 27th of July 2012 and a
spectacle watched by an estimated 900 million people around the world. It is
often said to be one of the best moments from the Olympic Games opening
ceremony.