TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 in and on Saturday afternoon at three. BBC News at four o'clock. The
Metropolitan Police has apologised to the victims of Wayne Cousins after the
former officer was sentenced to 19 months in prison for exposing himself to
women in Kent on three occasions. He's already serving a life sentence for the
kidnap, rape and murder of Sarah Everard. The last offence took place just days
before the 33-year-old was killed. Stuart Cundie is the Deputy Assistant
Commissioner of the Met. Like many, I wish that Wayne Cousins had been arrested
for these offences before he went on to rape and murder Sarah Everard. And for
that, I'm sorry. I recognise that the confidence, the trust in us as the Met
Police and the trust in our ability to respond is something that we've got to
earn back. Politicians, refugee charities and Border Force officials have
criticised the government's proposal to ban anyone arriving in a small boat from
claiming asylum in the UK. Under the legislation, illegal migrants would be
removed and banned from applying for British citizenship. A new bill will be
introduced to Parliament tomorrow. Firefighters have voted overwhelmingly to
accept a new pay offer, ending the threat of strikes. Members of the Fire
Brigades Union voted for industrial action in January, but the walkout was
suspended when the new offer was tabled. The new deal includes a 7% increase
backdated to July 2022, plus an additional 5% from July this year. Police in
South Wales, searching for five people, have found three dead and two seriously
injured two days after they went missing following a night out. A car was
discovered crashed near woods on the outskirts of Cardiff in the early hours of
this morning. Consultant doctors in England are to be balloted on strike action.
Their union, the British Medical Association, said they'll be asked to vote next
month on whether to walk out in a dispute over pay and pensions. The TV channel
GB News has been found in breach of broadcasting rules over claims about Covid
vaccines. Broadcaster Mark Stein made allegations about the third vaccine that
Ofcom says were materially misleading. BBC News. In half an hour, we'll be
asking whether modern life, dominated as it so often is by computers, leaves us
with more unfinished business and if so, whether that's a bad thing. The Digital
Human is at half past four. First on Radio 4, it's the concluding part of this
series of Roleplay. Each week, we've been hearing stories of people from across
the world who've all played the same dramatic parts. This week, it's the turn of
the two tramps from Waiting for Godot, Vladimir and Estragon. Hi, so I'm Tweedy,
currently stood in the auditorium of the Everyman Theatre. It's a huge stage for
Waiting for Godot. We present Waiting for Godot by Samuel Beckett. One of the
things mainly I remember is standing behind the curtain waiting for it to go up
because I've never been in that situation. And me being behind the curtain,
sorting my big boots out and waiting for Godot. The scene, a country road, a
tree. Beneath it, Estragon, dressed as a tramp, is trying to take off his boot.
The entire play takes place on the side of a road. There is a tree in a very
specific spot upstage and I think it's to the right. And downstage and to the
left is a stone. We had a real tree in our case, taken from some corner of the
highlands. It got bent over by the wind. Waiting for Godot, you know? Who is the
Godot? For each of us, there is a Godot waiting. Will he come? We don't know.
Waiting for Godot is a very simple play. And the first line that is spoken
states the theme boldly and clearly. Nothing to be done. The two characters,
when the curtain rises, are on stage. Gogo's sitting on the stone. Vladimir is
standing upstage, looking at the sky. We eventually discover, not too long into
the play, that they are waiting for somebody called Godot. We don't know who. We
just discover we don't know why. And they are traps. That's really as much as we
know. They may or they may not have been there for a million years. They may be
there for the first time. I'm Marty Ray. I played Vladimir in Waiting for Godot
with Aaron Monaghan. I'm Aaron Monaghan and I played Estragon, or Gogo, opposite
Marty's Vladimir in Waiting for Godot with Druid Theatre Company, which is based
on the west of Ireland. Let's go. We can't. Why not? We're waiting for Godot.
Ah, yes. At its first performance in Paris on the 5th of January, 1953, it
created something of a scandal. After all, many in the first night audience
thought a play is supposed to have a plot. Beckett wrote it in French first. He
was part of the French Resistance. He was down with his wife in the south of
France, waiting. He rewrote it in English. But to our ears, he wrote it in a
very hiberno English that I think he would have heard a lot in Ireland. One of
the first lines that Vladimir says is, so there you are again. You can read so
many existential ways into it, but it's also a very Irish thing to say. So there
you are again. Let's have a closer look at the characters of Estragon and
Vladimir. They call each other Didi and Gogo. Essentially, Vladimir is the
optimist, always trying to find a reason for hope. And Estragon is the
pessimist, who constantly brings them back down to the reality of just how
desperately alone they are. Another day done with? Not yet. For me, it's over
and done with, no matter what happens. I think we both felt we were in the right
roles because I am somewhat squat, and I kind of tend to hunch over and get a
bit grumpy and angry. And Marty can be thinking all the time. Too loud and self-
important. I mean, they were like a married couple. They were like siblings.
They were like enemies. From the very first performance, and clearly with Samuel
Beckett's approval, they were made to look like the somewhat seedy, down and out
characters of silent film comedy, dressed in worn suits, wearing battered bowler
hats and large boots with holes in the soles. Vladimir and Estragon, I feel they
were clowns from, say, a music hall, possibly a double act, that had fallen on
bad times. The world had turned against them. I could really see Laurel and
Hardy playing them. They're kind of my biggest heroes. I'm Tweedy. My real name
is Alan Digweed, but most people call me Tweedy because I'm a clown and it's
become a nickname. I grew up in Aberdeen, and as a kid, because I was small, I
got away with the lot. So I was always kind of clowning, but I didn't really
realise what it was until later. I managed to get a few addresses, circuses and
things, and wrote to them saying, how do you become a clown? And one wrote back
saying, the best way to learn is on the road. For quite some time now, I've been
with Gifford Circus, and then in the winter, I've been here, where we are now,
at the Everyman Theatre in Cheltenham. They all love kind of the pantomime, put
everything into it. This is the Tweedy that audiences are used to, clowning
around with trademark red quills. There's a whole thing with clowning in that
it's used as a bad word, and it's frustrating. And politicians are described as
clowns frequently, which to me is really annoying because clown is about
bringing joy. It's about having empathy. So I've been clowning for over 20
years, when I decided I wanted to kind of explore different sides of performing,
and Godot seemed like a great way to do it. All I need for you to do is to
disappear. Where? The tree, the tree. Basically, the Everyman Theatre put this
play on because I wanted to do it. I played Estragon. I think he's kind of
slightly lower status, and he felt closer to what my clown is naturally. And I
don't know if it was to prove that I could do it to myself, or to prove to
audiences that I'm not just a clown. I think it was more to say that clowning is
everywhere. We embraced. We were happy. What do we do now that we're happy?
Waiting for Godot is not two old guys just leaning against a bench, chattering.
It's full-on physical. It's singing in the rain without the rain. I'm Bill
Patterson. I played the part of Estragon in the production of Waiting for Godot
at the Royal Lyceum Theatre in Edinburgh, with Brian Cox as Vladimir. Well,
essentially, both of the men have issues, as any men of a certain age have.
Estragon has problems with his feet. Vladimir has a prostate issue and
incontinence. I didn't get up in the night, not once. You see, you piss better
when I'm not there. And that gives me a sort of vulnerability that makes it
rather appealing. In terms of the use of humor in the play of Waiting for Godot,
it's really kind of inherent, the vaudevillian. And so we really immersed
ourselves in that, watched a lot of vaudeville, but not only that, watched a lot
of black vaudeville, I never forget watching a video and a guy was doing a
crutches routine. He had one leg, he was bouncing and doing all this great
stuff. And us as black people have always kind of needed humor, used humor as a
means to not lose our minds. And so, you know, having that angle was kind of
really the waters on which the play floated. Hello and good afternoon from New
Orleans, one of the world's most famous and vibrant cities, now a scene of
devastation and human tragedy. Just a week ago, Hurricane Katrina... I'm J. Kyle
Manzay. I was one of the founding members of the Classical Theater of Harlem.
And as a member there, I played Estragon Gogo in Waiting for Godot, alongside of
Wendell Pierce. I do think there's these plays that people say that are
brilliant because other people said they were brilliant. And I didn't understand
it. And when I started to dive into it, quite literally, because the first
version we did was in a 16,000-gallon swimming pool, it just really had much,
much, much different meaning. A year ago, the city filled with water. Thousands
were cut off and rescue came too late. Nearly 1,500 people died. It was right
after Katrina. Wendell Pierce is from Katrina. So he really was wanting to
express himself to bring awareness to it. The first incarnation was at the
theater in Harlem. They brought in a literal 16,000-gallon swimming pool, and
then they put a house in it to make it look like the house was filled up. We had
that run, and then after that, an artist by the name of Paul Chan saw the
production, was really taken by it. He had the idea of doing this in New
Orleans. When we went down to rehearse, we actually went around to people. We
heard their stories. We were in the Lower Ninth. The Lower Ninth was completely
decimated. It looked like it was going back to green space. There was one
gentleman, and he had his special needs cousin with him who didn't speak. And
they kinda, for us, almost represented Dee Dee and Go-Go. This guy had saw his
mother, his grandson, and one other family member float away and die. And so he
was very close to it. And this mission that we were there for really gave him
purpose. Last weekend, Godot got the big easy treatment when it was performed
outdoors in New Orleans' Lower Ninth Ward. The performance was free to the
public, and in classic New Orleans fashion, theater goers were treated to bowls
of gumbo before the curtain rose. Then a marching band led the crowd two blocks
away to a vacant lot where the play was staged. So the theme of waiting for
Godot to people meant a lot of different things, but the most apparent was
waiting for FEMA, the Federal Relief Agency. They didn't know what every moment
meant, but they knew the representation of them waiting and then them needing to
occupy their time to keep their sanity, to have a spiritual hope. We are no
longer alone waiting for the night waiting for Godot. Somebody may say, yeah,
man, FEMA never came. Some of them, yeah, man, I had to just work. A diversion
comes along, and what do we do? We let it go to waste. Let us get to work.
People hugged us. People cried. We cried together. It was quite an honor to have
that. I can talk about how it starts. We had this image of us hanging on the
telephone waiting to hear from the Beckett Estate. Thank you for calling the
Beckett Estate. Your call is important to us. Please continue to wait, and an
operator will be with you shortly. When the lights come up, the set looks like
what one would expect from a set for Waiting for Godot, and then we are on this
telephone, like one of those ones that's in a box by the side of the road,
waiting and waiting and waiting, as one does in Waiting for Godot. Samuel
Beckett consistently resisted alterations to his plays. This includes a blanket
ban on all-woman versions of Godot, Beckett declaring women don't have
prostates, but he's also written some of the most original and challenging
pieces of theatre, specifically for the female voice. I'm Josie. My pronouns are
she, her. I'm Cordelia. My pronouns are she, her. I'm Jack. My pronouns are
they, them. And we are Silent Faces Theatre. We met when we did a clown course.
I remember thinking, Oh, they're idiots, and I'm also an idiot. Godot is a Woman
came from a genuine desire for us as a company to perform Waiting for Godot, and
sitting in one of our living rooms in early 2019, talking about a game plan and
thinking, OK, we're going to ask for the rights to do Waiting for Godot, and
then it came up that, as a company of women and non-binary people, we were most
likely not going to get the rights. There was a situation where actually two
women did win the right to do it, but the ruling said that they had to play the
roles as men. These roles are your everyman character. They are in a show that
is entirely about, you know, being a part of the human race, and then you're
saying, but only this percentage of the population is allowed to perform that.
In this meeting, we sat and we said, OK, the game plan is to apply for the
rights, and then if we don't get the rights, to do Waiting for Waiting for
Godot, which we then realised was a much funnier idea. We sort of threw the idea
of Waiting for Godot out the window and said, actually, it's much more
interesting to discuss the gender roles in Waiting for Godot through the lens of
women and non-binary people who aren't allowed to perform those roles. The
trouble is when a playwright dies, suddenly their opinions are frozen, they are
trapped in amber. And so our argument is, can we really be certain that this is
what Samuel Beckett would want in 2023? One of the moments in the show that we
love performing is a feminist timeline since Samuel Beckett died in 1989, set to
a track from each year that something significant happened. I know that he
wanted four men to play it, and I know he brought a famous court case, which he
lost, about there was a production in the Netherlands about four women. But I
think he wrote them the way he wrote them and he wanted them performed that way.
Do the estate, do they kind of follow that religiously? I don't know why, but I
guess they're kind of fulfilling his wishes. I wouldn't necessarily agree with
that. I think they're the most interpretive plays. He gives you such an open,
empty stage. All the dead voices. They make a noise like wings. Like leaves.
Like sand. Like leaves. We really studied the rhythm that Beckett writes, which
is always really beautiful in his work, and we tried to emulate that so that a
lot of the rhythm of the way we talk to each other in Godot as a Woman is very
similar to the way that Vladimir and Estragon talk to each other in Waiting for
Godot. The dialogue is staccato. It's also very repetitive. And there are
recurring motifs throughout the play of the same bits of dialogue. Be things
like, let's go. We can't. Why not? We're waiting for Godot. Ah, yes. And it is
incredibly easy to lose track of which particular let's go. We can't. Why not?
We're waiting. You can easily slip into the next section. While they're waiting
for Godot, two other characters arrive. One is called Pozzo, who I suppose is
this big, gregarious character, I guess, and attached to the end of a rope which
he is holding is a noose which is around the neck of another character called
Lucky. And they have a conversation. After they leave, the moon comes up and it
becomes night. Yeah. And Go-Go falls asleep. A boy comes in and he seems to be a
messenger from Godot and tells Vladimir that Godot won't come tonight but he'll
surely come tomorrow. And then we have an interval. The characters say, let's
go, and they don't leave. Nobody comes, nobody goes. Everything is terrible.
That line is still in my head. My name is Velibor Topic. I'm from Bosnia-
Herzegovina, and I happened to be during the war between 1992 and 1994 in
Bosnia-Herzegovina in Sarajevo and happened to be a lucky man to work on the
play called Waiting for Godot, directed by Susan Sontag. In 1993, one of the
world's most renowned intellectuals, the writer and director Susan Sontag, came
to Sarajevo to stage Beckett's modern masterpiece. I had spent two weeks there
in April and had come to care intensely about the battered city and what it
stands for. Bosnia and its capital, Sarajevo in particular, had symbolised the
spirit of Yugoslavia, a place where Muslims, Serbs and Croats lived side by
side, none ruled alone. But with the old Yugoslav federation disintegrating
around it, the Bosnian government at the end of February held a referendum on
independence. The Muslim and Croat communities voted in favour, but most of the
Serbs boycotted the ballot. It was a recipe for disaster. We were all waiting
for something and waiting for Bill Clinton to help us. One day, I had to move
out from my student flat and I had to stay with this people's house in which
that night it was bombarded by the big rockets and shells. And this is how a war
becomes part of your life. And I was on the street and I was sleeping in three
coats and going to toilet on a piece of paper because there was no running
water. And I ate rice and, if I was lucky, a good grass around the trees. The
main obstacle, apart from the siege lighting, was the fatigue of the
malnourished actors. Several had to walk two hours to get to the theatre and, of
course, would have to follow the same dangerous route at the end of the day.
Almost every morning, she would bring and put nicely and neatly on the table
lines for each of us, a packet of cigarettes, a candle, a torch, a battery, and
a lighter, something which is very, very important to us, you know. Beckett's
play, written over 40 years ago, seems written for and about Sarajevo. We did
the play in kind of smallish theatre. It's called Theatre of Youth. It's exactly
what we needed, a couple of chairs, a little stage, and that was it. You know,
it wasn't difficult to act that. You are doing the play about expectation and
yet you hear outside screaming and snipers and the theatre shakes, but nobody
reacts because you are in that moment part of the theatre, part of the play, and
part of the audience. Oh, that's enough. I'm tired. And you'd rather just be
stuck there doing nothing? Yes. Well, please yourself. Let's go. We can't. Why
not? We're waiting for God, though. We all kind of know that this play can be
done and it always will be popular in every time of our suffering time or
something which we don't know what is going to happen, something that we are
waiting for, that the Godot never really comes. Who is a Godot? You know, for
me, it was Blink Linton. For me, it was a packet of cigarettes and a sandwich.
So for me, that was a Godot. Today, Ukrainians will do the same, maybe. It was
August 3, 1955. The time was 7.30 in the evening and the action or actions took
place in the Little Arts Theatre in Great Newport Street. When I first saw it,
it was in the 60s. So you're only talking about ten years after its first
production, both in London and in Paris, a year or two before that. So it was as
fresh as paint then. It still remains incredibly timeless. The theatre was
crowded and it was a hot summer night. Halfway through the entertainment, there
were numerous gaps in the auditorium. Less claustrophobic for the audience, but
alarming for the performers who were feeling the draught the other side of the
footlights. I know because I was one of them. You can feel the audience is
getting pissed off at us. If you go and see a play called Waitin' for Godot that
you've never seen before, maybe you're not a complete idiot to want to see
Godot. So when he doesn't turn up, you can feel him going, what is the point of
this play? Many of the lines were simply asking for trouble. Nothing happens,
nobody comes, nobody goes. It's awful. Hear, hear! It was a great actor, Robert
Maudley, a sort of West End actor and film actor. He woke up in the morning and
said, the end of theatre as we know it has happened since he had seen Godot. The
Sunday Times and the Observer went smartly into bat for the play. All this sort
of game had an immediate effect on both the box office and the reactions of the
audience. The customers arrived not only looking for a message with a capital M,
but getting it or them. The thing that Beckett, I think, is doing all the time
is he's trying to understand this thing called life that we all go through. And
the thing about life is there's only two real certainties about it, which is
we're born and then we die. And we're all heading there. And if we don't fill
the time up while we're waiting for that to happen, it's going to be unbearable.
Am I going to sit in the house thinking about that and panicking? Or am I going
to go out on the road with my friend, who's also a tramp, and wait for this guy
that I think we were told about? So it's strange. The more he kind of kept it
simple, the more immense it becomes, and more and more and more people, I think,
get stuff out of it. BELL RINGS OK. Sorry, some technical problems. OK. Nice to
meet you. Glad to see you. Me too. Welcome from Ukraine, from Uzhgorod. I am
Alexey, and I play as an actor in Seatte Uzhik. Ah, Seatte Uzhik, Refugee Seatte
Uzhik. And you are Vladimir. Vladimir. And I'm Sofia, I'm an extra gone, as an
actress in our performance. Ah, oh my God, the light is... Light is over in
Uzhgorod. In Uzhgorod is bad situation with light. When I first read this play,
I told my producer, I don't like to play this because I don't understand
anything. But then I began to understand that this is very deep and very
fantastic psychological theatre product. We are waiting something all time. We
are waiting for next day, we are waiting for next week, next year, next month.
This story is very actual now for many people in Ukraine. And it's reason why
our Vyacheslav choose this play for us. Some people cried during our play, and
some people laughed. During the war, during the difficulties, people have to
cry. People have to make some positive emotion, have to relax, have to think
about something excepting war. Maybe art, this is also the front, also the
battle, but not battle with weapons. This is the battle for souls. We can
support our people in this hard times, and I suppose this is our role today.
Everybody, this is Sonia's idea, everybody battles in his own front. The next
day, the same time, the same place. The second act is sort of, not quite, but
almost a repeat of the previous act. They wait for Godot again, the two
characters, Potts and Lucky, they come through. It's a bit more madcap I think.
Night falls again. And towards the end of the second act, Gogo falls asleep.
Didi then starts to, I mean it goes haywire. I used to hear this every night,
like Marty delivered that line, I can't go on. I can't go on. And you can feel
the audience kind of going, yeah! The boy comes in again and says Mr. Godot
won't come again today, but he will surely come tomorrow. He won't come this
evening, but he'll come tomorrow. He ends the play really beautifully, it's
beautifully talking about hanging themselves. We'll hang ourselves tomorrow,
unless Godot comes. And if he comes, we'll be saved. Wadimir says, well, shall
we go? Shall we go? Shall we go? Yes. Let's go. They do not move. Lights go down
and I still have the memory of the audience going, yeah, yeah. You can interpret
it, whatever you like to think what that waiting is for. And you just add that
into this position that we're essentially wondering when it comes to an end, was
there any point? And that's why I suppose the play will be around for a very
long time, because it doesn't come up with an answer. I have a very dear friend
who I'm sorry to say, passed away a year or two during the COVID time. And he
came to see the production with his wife. A year later, he said to me, Billy,
that play, did you know what that was about? So I said, well, take it from me
George, I'm not dead sure. But that's the best, a Katie and ending I can think
of. Roleplay was produced by Sam Grist and Camelia Sinclair. It was a BBC Audio
Bristol production for Radio 4. And if you missed the other episodes in the
series reflecting on the parts of Lady Macbeth and Peter Pan, you'll find those
on BBC Sounds. On BBC Radio 4. Is anyone alive out there? Rewinder with Greg
James. Now, come on, let's not be cynical. Let's not prejudge. Let's have a
listen together. You'll access all areas past for the BBC archive, where we
unearth rare audio artefacts and we get lost on strange and hopefully
entertaining tangents. And it came back with the pig. Is that it? Keep listening
to find out. The new series of Rewinder. Oddly captivating. Perhaps you're
right. Saturday mornings at 1030 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. I mean, get the
message. Now on Radio 4, the digital human with Alex Kratosky, who's dealing
with some unfinished business. Ever had that gnawing feeling that there is some
unfinished business you have an itch to resolve? Maybe it's a friendship you let
drift or something at work that you've left incomplete. Maybe it's just that
sense of too many tabs open at once on your computer. Our hyper connected modern
lives make it possible to forever be starting new things, leaving unfinished
business that never quite gets done. I know I get edgy when I have that niggly
feeling that there's something I've forgotten to complete. But should I let go
of my completionism and just let whatever it is go? Follow the conversation on
hashtag DigiHuman. Completing patterns, it seems, is an innate human urge. If I
placed three dots on a piece of paper now, most of us would automatically try to
complete it and see a triangle because we always try to see a completed figure,
an organized whole or a gestalt. Marianne Szydiak is a gestalt psychotherapist
and an organizational consultant. When a gestalt is not complete, there's no
satisfactory resolution. It extends to all aspects of our lives. So this
tendency towards meaning making, towards closing patterns is a fundamental
aspect of human experience. And so we attempt to make meaning out of what we
feel as well in order to make sense of our emotional life. This means that
psychologically, we try to understand and complete the gestalt of our experience
in a meaningful way. So completing the pattern of a triangle is simple enough,
but our emotional lives are a bit more complex. And understanding the gestalt of
a particular event in our life or a difficult relationship isn't always
straightforward. My name is Laura Carney and I am a writer and journalist based
in New Jersey. Laura Carney recently completed a book. It's called My Father's
List and it's based on a long term project to finish the bucket list of her late
father. My dad wrote it in 1978, we found out later from our mom. So I don't
think the word bucket list even existed back then. It was more a list of life
goals that he had. It had been sitting there for 13 years since my father's
death because of a distracted driver. As soon as I saw it, my husband and I
simultaneously knew that I needed to finish it. The list gave her the chance to
pursue some form of closure. I think I was a little bit frozen at the age of 25.
That was what really instigated my need to do something that would finish this
thing that had just been lingering. I'll openly admit, I do think now that there
was a part of this project that for me was almost like a surrogate or substitute
for my father. I don't have to think of him as this dead person who died
suddenly. And quite honestly, when I was 25, part of me was angry, not just with
how it happened, but paradoxically with him. Like, why were you on that road
where you were? You left me that kind of a feeling. So to have something where,
oh, no, now he's very present and he's with me all the time and he's helping me,
that was certainly was softening the blow of this trauma and this grief I was
still carrying. Completing the list took Laura across the world from L.A. to
Berlin. It had her running 10 miles straight, riding a horse fast, sailing
alone, skydiving. And while this might sound daunting, she did it one step at a
time. Yeah, small finishes. Some of the things on the list were quite daunting,
like talk with the president, correspond with the pope, have my own tennis
court. I mean, these are the things that when my mom first found the list when I
was a baby, she was like, what is this? My parents divorced when I was six, so
she didn't know that he kept checking it off his whole life. Every time I was
doing one of the items, I was sort of in this other world in a way, my dad's
world, you know, like the world of his goals and his dreams. And I think that
there was something powerful about letting myself live in that moment of joy,
that it was like the opposite effect of the pain and bitterness and sorrow of
losing him the way that I did. The phrase unfinished business in Gistalt refers
to situations in the past where people haven't achieved a satisfactory closure
or resolution. So acknowledge what is unfinished, name it, even write it down
can be helpful and make room for exploring it. What is the need that hasn't been
met? It is helpful to identify smaller or more manageable steps or actions that
can be taken to let go of the unfinished business. Often the key step in helping
someone overcome unfinished business is to create the support for an emotional
expression or an action or closure that will allow the person then to move on.
There comes a time when the thing you set out to do is done, which then begs the
question, what next? I think quite a number of people were worried about me. So
I did think, OK, well, if that's gone, am I going to be OK? I don't have this
armor, this My Father's List armor I've been wearing anymore. And it's turned
out to be OK so far. I mean, I was really tired. I even told my husband that. I
said, I have to finish this. I don't have anything left to give to this. It's
been almost six years. The final task Laura completed was to record five songs.
The last one I did was Goodnight by the Beatles. Of course, as a writer, I'm
always looking for symbolism, and I could just hear myself saying goodnight,
almost like, you know, to me it was really poignant. I'm not saying goodbye to
my father. I'm just saying goodnight. And it felt like a soft landing from this
flight I'd been on this whole time. It was emotional. It reminded me of him
tucking me in. I got to let him go the way I wanted to. I slept for a really
long time that night after I was finished. I felt this calm overtook me that I
had never felt before. And I think it was just this feeling. It's not just like,
oh, God, I finished. Like, I wasn't sure if I could, but I did. I had released
something. I took this thing I'd been carrying that was painful and almost
torturous sometimes, and I turned it into this book. That's like giving my dad
this legacy that never goes away. And at the same time, him helping me become a
published author and helping me with my passions and my dream. And I think
that's a beautiful thing. Laura now has her own bucket list, with one of the
items to write a book, Tick. And for her, this is another way to draw
inspiration from her father's free spirit and his imagination. Any time that
something has just come across my attention that seems really cool or fun or
something that I've always wanted to do but kind of forgot about, I just write
it on there. I think I have 70 or 80 things on there right now. I don't feel any
pressure whatsoever to finish that list. It brings me a lot of joy to know it
exists. Laura experienced a sense of closure by completing her father's list,
but not all relationships can be closed. I'm pretty sure everyone still has one
person they still hold a torch for, one devastating tale of unrequited love. In
the good old days, those kinds of situations eventually were closed by
proximity. It's hard to leave something lingering when you run into it once a
month, week, or even day. But now, in our hyper-connected, disproximate modern
era, it is possible to leave someone hanging in the digital ether forever. And
we have developed a whole new vocabulary for this kind of unfinished business,
breadcrumbing, submarineing, benching, ghosting. I'm Leah LaFever. I'm an
associate professor at the University of Alabama, and I study the intersection
between mediated communication and romantic relationships. So looking at all the
things, the adaptations between how technology has changed how and what we do
when we're communicating. One of the areas of research that you have been
looking into specifically is a phenomenon that is really facilitated by the
internet, and it's ghosting. Yeah, ghosting. Kind of a layperson's term is sort
of like cutting off communication or ceasing communication with another person.
One person has chosen to opt out of the communication or relationship with the
other person, and as a result, the other person feels that loss or disconnect or
cutting off of that communication in that process. It would have been so much
more rare offline. I know people, for example, who are estranged from family
members, and the psychological experience of it seems to feel very similar.
Yeah, it's exactly what you're saying. But this idea you're suggesting of this
media component, I think really changes the dynamic. Particularly because lots
of times it happens on your personal phone, and we know our phones are so
connected to us, right? And it's, I think, furthered by the process with the
mediated component is I can still see you active probably in a lot of other
venues. So I see you checking into places, posting pictures, looking at things,
but then you're choosing not to interact with me. Yes, people used to withdraw,
but maybe I'm not running into you at the grocery store or at another sort of
social event, but in this instance, I can see you active in all these
capacities, you're just not choosing to be active with me any longer. You
mentioned the relationship that we have with our phones. To what degree does
ghosting feel even more significant via technology? Because we have a tendency
to project ourselves into our technologies, and perhaps, as some research has
suggested, be more open and honest with people via technologies. The
connectivity to it also allows for other sort of dynamics to potentially happen,
particularly if you have been ghosted. So for instance, I might ruminate, I
might be going over the messages that you previously sent me, I might look at
your account if you've blocked me, I may go to other accounts to see what you've
been doing. Sometimes you're sort of doing that to just see the safety of the
other person. Are they okay? Are they healthy? Are they alive? But other times
you're doing it even if you know the relationship is no longer existing or the
other person doesn't clearly want to communicate. And I think it can sometimes
create unhealthy patterns because your phone is so readily accessible, and you
might be pining over some of those to try and have some resolution or closure,
which oftentimes ghosting doesn't allow for. What about ghosters' regret? I
mean, yeah, I've done it. And I do regret it. I got busy or, you know, I moved
on or whatever, and suddenly the conversation couldn't be as present anymore.
But I still think about it, and I'm like, oh, it didn't really end that well.
Yeah. I love that question. That's something we've just started looking into,
considering most people are both. They hate having it done to them, but they do
it to others. So what is the impetus behind it? Do ghosters have, like, lower
empathy, or are they not able to display it, or do they not understand sympathy
for the other person, considering they've experienced it? But instead, that
really wasn't panning out in some of our studies, so we started looking at this
idea of regret and remorse. And we have a small sample right now. We've just
expanded it, but even in the small sample, about 100 participants, about 50%
said they had some regret or remorse for ghosting the other person, which is
much higher than I thought it would be. Some of the rationale, we've just
started looking at the qualitative data to it, is looking at, like, oh, this
person was really nice, or I'm miscommunicating with them, but I've already
moved on, or it's been too long since I have, so I don't feel like I can go
back. But it's interesting that we're seeing that they think about this long
after. Ruminating over what we did or didn't do, should or shouldn't have said,
can really get under your skin. Marianne Szydiak. We can, for example, all
recognize walking away from an uncomfortable interaction or even a dispute, and
it's playing out over and over in our minds. So what we would have wanted to say
or do and didn't or felt unable to do at the time is always going round and
round in us, and it can be quite difficult to let go. In a work context, let's
say an individual experienced a very distressing interaction with their boss or
was bullied and wasn't able to stand up for themselves. If they haven't
processed this appropriately, they might interpret every difficult interaction
with someone in authority or with a boss as an instance of bullying or feeling
helpless. This type of unfinished business clearly would prevent us as human
beings from appropriately responding to the present moment or, as we say in
Gistalt, to the here and now. It can be challenging to stay in the present,
though, when links to the past are so accessible. Our archive of old posts and
emails is Hyper Here and Hyper Now with one simple click. Leah Lefevre. Some of
the research I've done with a couple other colleagues, we've looked at sort of
these artifacts that are left behind and artifacts meaning like pictures, text
messages, communications, song lists that we have, all these different facets.
And sometimes I think the unfinished business, like we've cultivated all these
different connections and artifacts and objects online. And some of those,
because of that, allow us to continue these relationships and communication even
after they've, quote, ended. But existentially, they're unfinished. The impact
of unfinished business varies from person to person, from context to context.
And in some situations, it's actually more of a motivator than a heavy weight.
This has been harnessed by some industries to hold our attentions and to drive
us forward. I am Nastassia Griffiou. I am a postdoctoral researcher at the
University of Twente and at the Games for Emotional Mental Health Lab. As a
gamer, as well as a researcher, Nastassia brings a nuanced perspective to the
joypad. I think I do have a personal propensity towards wanting to finish
certain to-do lists. I'm definitely also very sensitive to the rush of reward
that you get once you can check that off your list. And the same goes for video
games. I think it gives you a very clear feeling of you know what you have to
do. And some people enjoy that. It is a buzz to tick things off a list. But
personally, this is often offset by the overwhelming number of things to be
done. I'm not the only one who suffers with this, what is known as the Zygarnik
effect. The Zygarnik effect is named after a Lithuanian psychologist in the 20th
century. It's an effect which she found that people are better at remembering
tasks that they haven't finished yet. There's a lovely story that goes with
that, that led Bluma Zygarnik to notice the phenomena. And it starts apparently
on some cold autumn day, you know, in a coffee shop in Vienna. And she was
sitting with a group of university students and she noticed that despite a
fairly large number of people in their group, the waiter remembered all the
orders for teas and coffees and cakes and also who had ordered them. She was,
you know, quite intrigued. And so she went back, you know, a bit later and asked
whether he could remember. But the waiter couldn't retain that information even
for a short period of time. The classmate of Zygarnik, Avsemkina, was a Russian
psychologist. She actually focused on what happens action-wise when people are
interrupted from a task. And she found that people have a higher tendency of
resuming those tasks when they're interrupted. So the Zygarnik effect and the
Avsemkina effect both give us a sense of, OK, we don't really like when tasks
are unfinished. We are better at remembering them. They keep kind of gnawing at
our mind, which also drives why we go back to finish them. Once it's completed,
the mind then lets go. And so it can be useful to remember that when we need to
memorize information for an exam or a presentation, when we want to anchor
information, to spread the learning over time rather than try to learn it really
all quickly at once. And I've certainly come across writers, actually, who force
themselves to stop in the middle of a chapter. And so they have a compelling
need to start again. They use that discomfort. The issue here is, of course, to
have just enough discomfort to mobilize us to complete, but not too much.
Otherwise, it will feel overwhelming. If the task remains unfinished,
absolutely, that can become stressful at some point because it takes up
attentional capacity. There is so much out there on social media to see. The
temptation of keeping consuming that information is very great for us. And so
the fact that there's always new content looming around the corner, that is so
rewarding and tempting for us. Never ending content combined with the fear of
missing out keeps us glued to the endless stream of important and not news that
will never, ever stop scrolling by. Rohini Chatterjee knows this all too well.
She is currently running the news desk out of Delhi for the fact-checking
website, Boom. So much misinformation, so little time. Is there ever a sense of
completion? I don't think there is ever a sigh of relief in a newsroom because
once one thing gets done, your attention is drawn towards something else. You
know, by the time you've heaped a sigh of relief on one story, the next story is
already on your plate. With eager eyeballs driving up the need for even more
news 24-7, people like me now need to turn stories around with lightning speed.
How does Rohini square this with journalistic rigor? Accuracy takes a hit when
you are putting stuff out so quickly because any news agency publishes a copy
and within 15 seconds that copy is republished multiple times. Even when you're
covering the news and you're doing a longer story, you know that there are going
to be a hundred people taking the same angle. Many news outlets, what they do is
when news breaks, they will put out one sentence and then keep publishing one
para, then another para, then another para. Which means people can't turn away.
When does the story end? There has to be a point where you have to let go
because any story that you're following, any story that you're covering,
government wrongdoings, climate change, mental health, no matter how much you
cover a story, it will be unfinished. Sometimes even if the story is rolling,
say if it's election day, after the reactions come, you tell yourself, okay, at
8pm I'm going to stop, no matter what happens because these reactions are going
to keep coming. Accept at some point that, okay, this is done. In a way we are
spread a lot thinner than we used to be a century ago, for instance. There is a
massive amount of information coming at us, whether it be social or news
information or political information. And this is something that we're not
necessarily adapted to dealing with quite yet because it's such a recent
development. The intense level of focus required is simultaneously difficult to
sustain and to let go. I found myself not being able to zone out where, say, my
shift has gotten over at 7pm. Even at 8pm I would find myself looking at Google
Analytics to check if the story is doing well or not. Or I would think about,
now that I'm here, I might as well add another update or maybe tweak the
headline a little bit. And it definitely gets under your skin. Like an
addiction, right, where you're constantly putting out news and as and when you
update your live blog, you're getting little bits of traffic, like getting
points in a game. Drastic action was necessary. Rohini needed to recharge. The
news was not going to stop rolling by. I quit my job last year in December, my
full-time job, and I took a break from news for seven months to unwire my brain.
You know, even when I didn't have a job, I would keep going back to Twitter. I
would keep going back to Google News. And it took me a couple of months. And
this is something physical, right? And I don't think people understand this,
that it's almost a physical reaction that you have. The excitement is a physical
reaction. Writer Ruth Sutton is no stranger to this physical reaction. After a
successful career in education, she decided she wanted to become a crime writer.
I didn't have travel on my bucket list because I was traveling all the time. But
I did have writing a novel top of my bucket list. Nine books later, Ruth has
exceeded her original ambitions. So is there a feeling of exhilaration each time
she reaches the final chapter or something else? Flat. The last few stages, the
last few weeks of writing an extended novel, what we're talking 90,000, 100,000
words, the last few weeks of that are intense, long hours and day after day and
a very high level of concentration. When it finishes, that energy has nowhere to
go. It washes about and it bumps into the end of your project. And you don't
feel very well, actually, because all this drive has no outlet. So the idea that
that's a satisfactory or a happy feeling, I don't recognize that. I recognize
loss and almost distress. Marianne Szydiak. When we fully engage in a task and
we're also when we're doing something we love or that motivates us, it's not
just normal, but I think expected to feel and I use this word grief at letting
go of it. And it's after all part of the human condition that with, you know,
every beginning is an end. And so grieving is also part of human life, which may
be, you know, these days we don't allow ourselves to feel or recognize enough.
The temptation might be to jump straight into another intense project. Do I want
to write any more? Substitute one project for another immediately to keep that
flow going. What's the impact? Physiological impact, emotional impact. That's a
tough one. I'm struggling with that now. My instinct says no. My readers, when I
meet them, say, oh, you can't stop because, you know, when's the next one coming
out? So there's pressure, which I can resist, but there is pressure. What I
think will happen is that my own curiosity about where I live will drive me into
more research. And I don't know whether I'll be able to resist it. I will try
hard to resist it because it takes over your life. I'm preparing for a tussle
with myself about that. The end of a novel is finite. The end, right? You could
start another. You'd know what you were in for the next time around, of course.
But we never really finish scribbling out our own stories in the online world.
Social tech isn't really designed to have an end point. And so the compulsion to
keep writing may feel never-ending. Instagram has, for instance, implemented a
system where in the news feed, when you scroll through the posts, at some point
you get a notification that you've seen all of the new posts and everything that
will follow will be content that you've probably already seen before. Being able
to become aware of that and being able to reflect on whether your goals have
been achieved, that really helps. The tricky thing is that even though
cognitively we might value this awareness and being made aware of this because
we feel like it gives us agency and autonomy to act on it in a way that we want
to and not feel controlled by social media, I've also noticed that it's a very
fine line between making people aware and pulling people out of this immersive
experience that they do enjoy. Humans are contrary, messy creatures, complicated
to design for, and sometimes there is just no pleasing us. We crave the escapism
of immersion, even though it's not always good for our health. But something is
always pushing us hard to be more than just good enough. Ruth Sutton. In the
first two or three of the novels, the concept of good enough was more offensive
to me because I felt, no, this may be all I ever do, and I would be upset if my
legacy was a mediocre book. I have to say that as particularly the last two
books were both written as lockdown books, the purpose of those was to keep me
from going insane when I couldn't do anything else. The drive had to go
somewhere and it couldn't go into other activities, so it had to go into
something. So identifying our priorities is significant. What is compelling us
to embark on a task in the first place? In the busyness, we might be overlooking
a resolution that really matters to us. We're often not in touch with our needs,
and so many of us make meanings and choices which don't always lead to
satisfying outcomes for us. As with most things, whether it's in a digital age
or not, it comes back to self-awareness. My boyfriend, for instance, he used to
be very much a completionist in the sense that he wanted to finish all of the
objectives in a game, collect all of the collectibles, so much so that at a
certain point he was feeling like, this is not necessarily the way I enjoy
playing video games anymore. What it boils down to is basically talking to
yourself about this and being also compassionate to yourself. Look, life on and
offline is complicated. There will inevitably be loose ends. In classical crime
fiction, the last chapter wraps everything up, all the little subplots. I find
that deeply unsatisfying because it removes the story from the reality of life,
and the reality of life for me is unfinished, ambivalent, unsatisfactory. I
remember getting an email from one of the readers saying, we think you've left a
chapter out, because after this chapter, there must be one at the end where
everything's sort of sorted out. And no, there wasn't. Our lives are full of
unresolved issues, and we have to cope with that. It's the concept of good
enough again, good enough to move on. Sometimes it doesn't have to be perfect.
It just has to be done. You've been listening to The Digital Human. For more on
what went into this episode, go to our BBC web page and listen again on BBC
Sounds. The Digital Human was presented by Alex Krotoski and produced in
Edinburgh by Lindsay Moyes. The audio you are currently listening to will stop
working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker and
hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on
web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. It's all done
unseen. Wednesday mornings at 9.