TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's 1 o'clock GMT. Hello and Namaste. I'm Devina Gupta and this is Business
Matters on the BBC World Service. Today we are live with our guests in Colombia
and Bangladesh. And we have lots lined up for you. A look at the world's second
largest economy. It's a big weekend in China as thousands of delegates make
their way to Beijing for the annual National People's Congress. Loads is
expected from the top team reshuffle for China's president to talks around trade
tensions with the US and challenges ahead for the businesses as China reopens
after strict COVID lockdowns. All that in a bit. Also India kick-starts the
much-awaited women's version of the popular cricket league IPL. But will it be
able to attract brands? On Business Matters here on the BBC after the latest
news. BBC News with Sue Montgomery. The Colombian government says that more than
80 people who were taken hostage by protesters in the south of the country have
been released. Most were police officers who'd been trying to clear a road that
had been blocked for three weeks. Leonardo Rocha reports. The group was detained
by community leaders after a disastrous police operation on Thursday night in
which two people were shot dead. The protesters were demanding that an energy
company exploring for oil in the region fulfil its promises to improve
conditions on the road. President Gustavo Petro has promised to visit the area
in Colombia's Amazon rainforest region to hear the demands of local residents.
The speed in which the incident was resolved is a big boost for Mr Petro. The
former left-wing rebel came to power last year promising to resolve problems
through dialogue. The head of the African Union has congratulated the winner of
Nigeria's presidential elections, Bola Tenubu, as his defeated rivals challenged
the result. A court has allowed the second and third placed candidates access to
materials held by Nigeria's electoral commission to prepare a possible legal
challenge. Here's Will Ross. Any legal challenge is likely to allege that
Nigeria's electoral body broke the law during the vote count. Officials at more
than 170,000 polling stations were supposed to have quickly uploaded scanned
copies of the results. The new electronic system was meant to make the whole
process more transparent, but the tortoise-like pace at which the results were
made public led to suspicions of foul play. Peter Obi, who was 12 percentage
points behind the winner, has also suggested that in his strongholds there was a
deliberate plan to make it hard for people to vote. A disgraced lawyer has been
jailed for life for murdering his wife and son in a case that's gripped the
United States. Prosecutors said Alex Murdoch carried out the killings to divert
attention from his theft of millions of dollars from clients, which he used to
fund a drug habit. The Roman Catholic Church in Portugal has asked victims of
child sex abuse for forgiveness, following a report by an independent inquiry
that found that nearly 5,000 children had been abused by clergy since 1950.
Bishops were meeting in the city of Fatima. Alison Roberts reports. The bishops
announced plans to make public gestures of contrition and at some point a
monument to victims. They also pledged to act on suggestions made by the
independent commission that produced the report, such as setting up a group to
hear from victims who have yet to come forward. But the details were scant, and
victim support groups were quick to criticise what they saw as a lack of
decisive action, particularly regarding priests on a list of alleged abusers
handed to bishops. Church officials said that no cleric could be suspended
without firm evidence. BBC News. The head of the United Nations' nuclear
watchdog is preparing to meet senior leaders in Iran after his inspectors
detected uranium enriched to near weapons-grade level in the country. Rafael
Grossi is expected to meet Iran's President Ebrahim Raisi on Saturday. Diplomats
say Mr Grossi will make another attempt to get Iran to increase its cooperation
with UN inspectors. The International Atomic Energy Agency says uranium
particles enriched to nearly 84% purity have been found at Iran's underground
Fordow nuclear plant. The White House says President Biden had a cancerous skin
lesion successfully removed from his chest last month. His doctor says no
further treatment is required. Nami Iqbal reports. When the president had his
regular physical check-up last month, his doctor, Kevin O'Connor, removed what
he called a small lesion on Mr Biden's chest. The tissue was sent for a biopsy
the same day. The results confirmed that it was basal cell cancer, which does
not tend to spread as other more serious skin cancers do. Dr O'Connor said it
had healed well and the 80-year-old president would continue to be monitored as
part of his ongoing health care. In January, the first lady, Jill Biden, had
surgery to remove two cancerous skin lesions. The head of the European Union
delegation to the Palestinian territories has called for those behind a deadly
rampage in the occupied West Bank village of Huwara to be brought to justice.
Israeli settlers set fire to Palestinian properties after two Israeli brothers
were killed there. One of the first black officers in the US Army's Special
Forces has received the nation's highest military award, nearly 60 years after
he was recommended for bravery in the Vietnam War. Colonel Paris Davis had
disobeyed orders and risked his life to rescue some of his troops in an attack
in 1965. Hello and Namaste. I'm Devina Gupta and you're with Business Matters on
the BBC World Service. It's a show where we connect with two guests from
opposite sides of the world to talk about business stories that are shaping your
world. So today we are live in Colombia and Bangladesh. And thank you for your
company, Edessa, because it's almost 0106 GMT here in the studio and with me in
the gallery are Gideon, Matt, Paul and Chris. We're all bringing this programme
to you wherever you are in the world. So do drop in a hi or tell us what you
would like us to talk about. You can write to us at world.business at bbc.co.uk.
And here's what's coming up. It's a big weekend in China and India as delegates
gather for the annual National People's Congress in Beijing on Sunday. India is
kickstarting the women's version of the popular cricket league IPL. So two big
stories from the region and. Well, that sounds nice, doesn't it? It's a violin
that is over 300 years old. But how much would you bid to own it? That's the
business of auction later in the programme. And let me on that note, quote
unquote, get our guests in. We have Sergio Guzman, who is from Colombia, where
he runs his own risk analysis company. Hello, Sergio. How are you? Hi, Davina.
It's a pleasure to be back. Thank you so much. So, Sergio, you're a man with big
bucks. If you had the money, would you bid for a violin which is 300 years old?
Never. What? Come on. Come on. Let me let me get our second guest in Zima Islam,
journalist for The Daily Star in Dhaka. And she's joining us from Bangladesh. So
Zima, hello. And would you then if you had the money? So this conversation is
strictly if you had like millions of dollars. Yes, I probably would. I would bid
for a 300 year old violin. Yes, I like collecting things. And hello. Hello to
Sergio. It's great to be back on the show with you. Great stuff. So I used to
talk to you. Thank you. And I asked actually in the gallery and Chris told me
that, well, you could bid for it. You could have it. But what about playing it?
So why not pay somebody to play that violin? People with big money, big dreams,
but it doesn't cost much to listen to it, does it? But we talk about the
business of auction in a bit, Sergio and Zima. Let's first talk about a cover
story. The world's second largest economy, China, where thousands of delegates
are heading to Beijing as the National People's Congress opens on Sunday. Now,
it beats once a year to set out some of the countries. I can hear that it's
pretty early for you, Zima. So just be with me for a bit. We will talk about
interesting stories from your region as well. But the National People's Congress
meets once a year to set out some of the country's key economic goals. So as
Zima gets her tea, we are going to find out why it's important for the country's
economy. Here's the BBC's China media analyst, Kerry Allen. The National
People's Congress begins on Sunday, and that's the annual meeting of China's top
legislature. It's sort of like the US House of Representatives. And what
normally happens is around 3,000 people come together in Beijing. They ratify
legislation, personnel changes and the government budget. It's regarded by
analysts, along with another meeting that takes place at the same time between
China's top advisory body, as a platform for the Communist Party to rubber stamp
major policy changes. And this will be a really interesting year. It's the first
time that Congress will have met since zero Covid measures came to an end. So
there are expectations that will be many new policies framed around
reinvigorating China's economy. We're also expecting to see President Xi Jinping
consolidate his position of power by announcing a new economic team. There are
going to be new people appointed at the top of China's economic and regulatory
bodies, including the central bank. And there are expectations that the party
will want to replace reformists and exert more power over the existing systems.
There's also going to be a new premier. Xi Chang is expected to be Xi Jinping's
new right hand man. And analysts believe that he will be given a higher degree
of autonomy when it comes to economic affairs, enabling him to take bold actions
in the country. Well that was BBC's Kerry Allen and I promised Zima to make this
conversation interesting. So Zima be with me. Let's get Rebecca Chung Wilkins,
Bloomberg's senior Asia correspondent who's joining us from Hong Kong and she's
been covering the region. So Rebecca, first up, can you just tell us what
exactly are global investors watching out for from this event? Absolutely. Well,
I'm going to try and keep my best to wake up Zima too. But this is a critical
moment for Xi Jinping. Leaders in China typically use the first MPC after
Congress, which happened in autumn when Xi Jinping secured that precedent
breaking third term. They use this moment essentially to revamp critical organs
of the government. And so what investors are really looking for are three big
things. The first is growth, where China is going to set its growth target. The
second is stimulus, just how much stimulus we're going to see or not,
particularly given the property crisis and the sort of fragile recovery we've
seen so far. And the third is going to be that restructure of critical financial
institutions primarily, the figures that are going to be placed in charge of
China's biggest economic bodies and its biggest regulators. So the growth target
has been projected to be between 5% to 6% for now. But how realistic are these
growth targets? Because China is reopening after lots of Covid restrictions.
There has been trade tensions with the US, the chip war, the technology sharing
clamped down as well. And let's not forget the entire spy balloons finger
pointing. Yes, things feel really feeble right now. And in fact, investors were
reflecting some of that hesitation. So earlier this month, we saw the reopening
rally, all these bets as China reopened various businesses sort of sputter out
and fade. What has happened, though, is that the last set of data that we've
shown has actually we've learned pleasantly surprised authorities in China. So
the growth target we might actually see will be more ambitious than we thought.
We also had this rare meeting from the PBOC, the outgoing, we suspect outgoing
PBOC head there, Yigong, really suggesting that China isn't prepared to do much
more beyond what it's already done in terms of monetary policy. It's going to
essentially keep things stable for now, suggesting that authorities are pretty
happy with the way and the sort of direction of travel for growth. Well, again,
talking about PBOC or the Central Bank of China, a lot is being expected about
Xi Jinping's new men of economics, because his top brass from vice premier to
governor and premier are all changing. And critics say most of them don't even
have overseas experience. They don't have academic credentials. What they do
have, of course, is loyalty towards Xi Jinping. But is it enough when China is
trying to be this power of emerging financial hub again after Covid
restrictions, given the geopolitical dynamics? Yeah, entirely. I mean, what we
sort of initially saw this lineup back in the autumn during Xi Jinping's
Congress when we started to see who these key figures were going to be in the
Politburo. And of course, we saw this outgoing of economic advisors who have
really deep academic and international expertise. Now the concern then, and we
saw more than a trillion dollar sell off on this, but the concern back then was
that Xi Jinping would essentially be surrounded by yes men who wouldn't sort of
tell him when things were going wrong. Now we're in a very different situation
now because Covid zero has lifted. And there's an alternative view here that
although these men may not have those same types of credentials, they have sort
of toughed it out in China's very fierce political system. They have a pragmatic
approach to policymaking. And rather than sort of rigid adherence to economics
per se, that experience may pay through now. They do, of course, also have
ultimate trust from Xi Jinping. So while they do have sort of these close
alliance, we may also see Xi Jinping trusting them to be somewhat more
pragmatic, somewhat more adventurous in some parts of policymaking. But Rebecca,
what about seeds of distrust that is being sown because between China's top
leadership and several tech entrepreneurs, you have big names from China's
technology sector like the CEO of Baidu, Tencent, these are big tech companies
who are not on this year's list of National People's Congress. How do you read
that? Yeah, absolutely. I mean, I think you touch on two key points here. And
the first is geopolitics is a bit of a wildcard because Beijing has been very
muted in terms of retaliating some of these very sweeping chip curbs that the
U.S. has enforced. But when we look at that delegate list, as you say, Tencent's
chairman has dropped off, Baidu and so on. These sort of really huge Chinese
internet moguls are no longer on the delegate list. And instead, we've seen them
replaced by sort of chip experts and experts in these sort of strategic
technological areas that the U.S. is targeting. So I think it really does
reflect this concern about the U.S. and its allies increasingly moving to try
and curb China's access to these key, key technologies. And we may well see more
of that specifically emerge around policymaking too once the NPC kicks off, but
certainly suggesting the direction of travel here. Well, I want to get Sergio
and Zhaiman in a bit because I know you have limited time with us. I just want
to ask you as well, in terms of Xi Jinping's common prosperity plan and the way
he's been trying to crack down on China's elite, trying to redistribute wealth
and pluck the wealth gap. He's been trying to tighten the reign around private
sector as well, especially tech companies. What kind of policy direction can one
hope for from this weekend on? Yes, indeed. Well, we don't think common
prosperity is going to totally fade. It's unlikely and unusual to see that sort
of U-turn from any sort of policymaking in China. But I think as you touched on
a little bit earlier, the critical issue here is the relationship between growth
and unrest and social unrest. China has to restore faith in the social contract.
That is the acceptance that with fewer freedoms, you should exchange fewer
freedoms for the promise of economic prosperity. And it is China's sort of
management of Covid and Xi Jinping's management of Covid has engendered a very
sceptical public, particularly in countries, in capitals like Shanghai, which
were locked down for months and months. So the critical factor here is not just
maintaining growth for the sake of the country and China's world standing, but
really to sort of restore faith in an increasingly sceptical public, too. And
also when you talk about restoring faith between the companies, because just
today there was news of Apple's partner Foxconn investing in China's neighbour,
India, about $700 million. And there are many companies which are also trying to
diversify and de-risk their positions by shifting to other locations around
China. Do you see that happening even more this year? I think that's likely. I
don't think we're going to see a sort of a movement away from China, but
certainly we see increasing diversification. People just want to spread their
risk. So I think that is likely to continue. And as you say, that clamp down on
the private sector in China, that really sort of very heavy handed feeling of
the state, the state's involvement and the role of ideology in the development
of the business sector in China, I think did spook many companies, including
international firms. Rebecca, if I could ask you just to stay on for a moment,
because I want to get Sergio and Zima's opinion on this as well, because Zima,
the shift which is being seen by many companies from China and trying to
diversify to other economies around the region, has Bangladesh benefited from
it? Certainly in terms of garments, yes, Bangladesh has benefited hugely because
right now I think we're the biggest competitor to China when it comes to ready-
made garments. But at the same time, we do have to remember that Bangladesh is
still probably second or third place in the supply chain. So we are still
dependent on China for all of the prime. Hello, can you hear me? Yes, Rebecca,
we can hear you here as well. Yes, we can. Zima, if you could just continue with
your point once, please. Right, I was just saying that from buttons, yarn, dyes,
capital machinery, we get all of that from China. So even though we're China's
biggest competitor when it comes to the global ready-made garments industry,
we're still completely dependent on China for literally everything that we need
to do to make that piece of garment, other than the labor. Everything else comes
from China. So it's a very interesting situation for us where we're definitely
competing with China, but at the same time, we're fully dependent on them. There
was an interesting moment earlier this year where the Chinese foreign minister,
he made a two-hour, just a two-hour stop at Dhaka while on his way to five
African countries. And that stopover, it blew us. We were wondering why would he
meet a foreign minister just for two hours, that too at midnight at an airport.
And while the Chinese counterparts didn't really have much to say about it, what
our foreign minister said that it is basically to address this issue, the trade
deficit, the gap between China and Bangladesh. And that's something that they
talked about on an urgent basis in an airport at midnight in January. Well,
there is no denying China's increasing influence in the region. It's often
called the string of pearl as well, the way it's invested in economies like Sri
Lanka, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nepal as well, the way it's trying to create that
network of investments through infrastructure and other projects. But Sergio,
looking at this event from Colombia, what does it mean for the country and its
economy? Because there are integrated supply chains between the two countries.
Oh, absolutely. So the company that you were talking about in the very first
part of the show, which was the company that was blocked for 40 days in
Colombia, that's a Chinese company. It's called Emerald Energy, and it's a
Chinese oil company. So Colombia does have a significant presence, but growing
of Chinese investment. So for instance, in Bogota, the two metro lines, the
first one has already been tendered off to China. The first regional rail tram
from Bogota to its neighbor cities is also Chinese company. In Medellin, the
metro is also been tendered off to a Chinese company. We have mining companies,
we have dredging companies, we have ports, shipping industry, more
infrastructure. And in fact, President Gustavo Petro wants to renegotiate the
first metro line so that he can underground it. And he's going to negotiate it
directly with Xi Jinping. And so the question that this Congress begs is, how
generous is China going to be with its budget abroad? Because those kinds of
things are going to be determined this week. And we can look at countries in
Latin America being very eager about that. And Rebecca, that's the question that
I wanted to ask. What about China's way of investing in other countries? Often
it's through projects and infrastructure projects. Sometimes it's also burned
its hands. I mean, let's not forget how a lot of money that's been given to
countries like Sri Lanka and Africa, they are not able to get it back. They have
to roll over the debt as well. So to the question that Sergio asked, how
generous can China be in this situation right now, when it's also looking at its
own domestic economy to help out other countries and give that kind of financial
investment? Absolutely. Well, I think China's domestic economy and domestic
concerns, particularly sort of social unrest protests, those are going to be the
primary concern for Xi Jinping going into the NPC. Once he deals with that, once
he restores a bit of stability and calm, he's going to be able to turn his focus
increasingly to foreign policy. As you say, lending through these infrastructure
programs, this sort of landmark Belt and Road Initiative as it's called, has
been the primary form of sort of extending China's diplomatic influence in the
world. But we have seen that lending, more than 1 trillion since 2013, really
pull back in the last couple of years. And Xi Jinping himself saying instead,
referring to these projects, that small is beautiful. So there does seem to be a
recalibration of just how much China is going to continue to lend. But when it
comes to countries that have already borrowed quite extensively from China that
are facing issues, so we think about Pakistan, we think about Sri Lanka, of
course, there have been quite a lot of criticism of China's inability or
potentially sort of unwillingness to negotiate. Now, we do see increasing
involvement, but that's going to be the big, big issue here if more emerging
market economies run into serious debt trouble, because China essentially is
going to become the world's largest distress debt creditor. And so we'll have to
figure out a model to deal with these, not just on an individual case by case
basis, but really sort of broadly across the board. What stance does it take? Is
it going to offer debt relief, for example? In fact, the Industrial Commercial
Bank of China just on Friday approved a rollover of about $1.3 billion loan for
Pakistan, which is also facing economic crisis. But another bit, which often is
not talked about in this story, is about China's birth rate that is falling.
There are high expectations about policies around how the working age population
is shrinking in China. It's the first decline it's seen in 60 years. Do we
expect some plans to be announced or conversations taking place around that?
Well, China's been trying to kickstart its birth rate really sort of in earnest
for the last five years at least. And it's really, really struggled to do that.
Of course, it sort of is the hangover from this one child policy that has been
lifted, but really has sort of created sort of a cultural lack of desire to have
large families. And we see the sort of difficulty of penetrating a problem like
this when we look at Japan, say. All right, Rebecca, thank you so much. We've
held on a bit longer to you, but really appreciate your insights into this very
economic, very important economic weekend in China. Thank you, Rebecca Chung
Wilkins from Bloomberg, senior Asia correspondent there, who was talking to us.
But Sergio and Zima, let's talk about this then, because looking at China's
birth rate falling, I mean, Zima, were you surprised when you saw that news?
After all, till now, the most populous nation of the world and competing closely
with India? No, not really, because I think there was definitely this space
during which China was recovering from their one child policy and people were
having larger families. When you've not grown up with siblings, you want to have
a larger family. But then, you know, this generation, most of us are not
married. We don't know when we're going to get married, when we're going to have
children. So it makes sense that the birth rate would be falling, especially
with the pandemic striking and the housing market becoming unreliable. The whole
concept of stability and having a family, a house with a picket fence, these are
concepts that don't seem very real to us anymore. I think we prefer pets, like
cats. Sergio, how did you view this news? Well, I think it's the natural
tendency of countries increasing their average incomes. People tend to have less
children, etc. But this is going to have a very, very significant impact on
China's pension system. If it is to develop one down the line, it is going to
create quite a bit of stress for them to be able to take care of their
population as it ages, both in terms of health care, in terms of pensions, in
terms of food and in terms of keeping the younger population in charge of
economic development. So it's very concerning. And absolutely, with the working
age population declining. I mean, the other extreme, of course, is Japan, which
is seeing this decline in more immediate terms now. And we will talk more about
that story as well. In a bit. But thank you so much, Rebecca, for joining us and
Sergio and Zyma for being with us on this half of Business Matters. We take a
short break. And on the other side, we continue talking more about other
business stories that are shaping your world, especially big weekend in India,
as the popular cricket franchise, Indian Premier League is kickstarting its
women's version. It took them 14 years to get there. They are finally there. But
are brands going to bet big on women's IPL or not? A lot about gender pay in
sports as well coming up on the other side. But keep listening to us. Do share
your views on world.business at bbc.co.uk. You're listening to the BBC World
Service. From the brilliant and bizarre. To the shocking and unexpected. Witness
the stories that have shaped our world. Told by the people who were there. Many
people had many things to lose by our victory. The future was not so bright.
Witness history. We had a designer. He brought in a fully storyboarded idea
about how the Queen would arrive by jumping out of a helicopter. And we all
said, that's brilliant, but it's never going to happen. Witness history at
bbcworldservice.com slash witness history, or wherever you get your podcasts.
BBC News. The Colombian government says more than 80 people who were taken
hostage by protesters in the south of the country have been released. The police
officers and oil workers were taken hostage following deadly clashes near an oil
field in Kaketa. The head of the African Union has congratulated the winner of
Nigeria's presidential elections, Bola Tenobu, as his defeated rivals mount a
legal challenge to the result. A court has given the second and third placed
candidates, Atiko Abubakar and Peter Obi, permission to access materials held by
Nigeria's electoral commission. A prominent US lawyer has been given two
consecutive life sentences for the murder of his wife and son in South Carolina.
Prosecutors said Alex Murdoch killed them to divert attention from his theft of
millions of dollars from clients. The Roman Catholic Church in Portugal has
asked victims of child sex abuse for forgiveness after an inquiry made clear the
extent of the offences. Washington has given Ukraine another $400 million in
military aid. It was announced as the German Chancellor Olaf Scholz met
President Biden in Washington. The head of the UN nuclear watchdog is preparing
to meet senior leaders in Iran after his inspectors detected uranium enriched to
near weapons-grade level in the country. Rafael Grossi is expected to meet
Iran's President, Ebrahim Raisi. One of the first black officers in the US
Army's Special Forces has received the nation's highest military award, nearly
60 years after he was recommended for bravery in the Vietnam War. Colonel Paris
Davis had disobeyed orders and risked his life to rescue some of his troops. BBC
News. Welcome back to Business Matters with me, Devina Gupta. We have our guests
from two different sides of the world with us. We have Sergio Guzman from
Colombia, where he runs his own risk analysis company. And we have Zima Islam,
journalist for the Daily Star in Dhaka in Bangladesh. And in this half of the
show, we are talking about the business of women's sports as India kick starts
the much awaited women's version of its famous cricket franchise, the IPL. We'll
talk about it in a bit. But first, Sergio and Zima, let's talk about what's
happening in your part of the world. The news that's caught your attention.
Zima, first, let's start with you. Oh, well, the one thing that we've really
been talking about this week has been a power deal between India and Bangladesh.
It was with Gautam Adani. And this power plant is, to say the least, it's going
to be running Bangladesh dry. So Bangladesh has been making these absurd power
deals with companies all over from China, from India. And most of these deals
are extremely, they're unequal, to the point where this summer we're not going
to have power. We're going to be, we're going to have massive power outages
because we won't be able to afford the power that we are supposed to be buying
from them. We've had, we've had deals with them. They're supposed to be
supplying us with power, but we won't be able to give them the fuel needed to
actually produce that power and buy that power. So we have all of these sitting
power plants and they're going to be getting capacity charges just to be sitting
around, not producing electricity, simply because we made deals with them. And
the Adani power plant promises to be something like that. We're supposed to get
over 1400 megawatts of power from this power plant that we don't need at the
moment because we have twice as many power plants as we, as electricity demand.
So India's Adani group is interesting also because it has seen its market value
plunge and is now trying to recover through financing after a US investment firm
made fraud allegations against it. So this news is completely interesting for
many on the other side of the border in India as well. But Sergio, what are you
seeing in the papers? So the biggest news story in Colombia this week was the
fact that there was an airline, low cost airline called Viva Air, which is part
of the Ryanair group that went belly up here in Colombia. Hundreds, perhaps
thousands of passengers were left stranded throughout the different parts of the
country. They were trying to get an agreement with the largest carrier, Avianca,
for a merger, but the superintendents of trade has not yet approved the merger.
And so Viva has been in financial trouble. And so this week they basically
pulled the plug on the airline, leaving a lot of passengers in trouble. Well,
that's interesting because our next story is actually related to airlines and
travel as well. And it has a mix of what you talked about, Zyma, in terms of
energy security needs. And this is the story. It's Europe's third busiest
airport. And it's now at the center of a faceoff between a group of airlines and
the Dutch government. Now last year, Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam cut its
annual number of flights from 500,000 to 440,000. The reason that the government
said was to reduce the industry's pollution and noise levels for the residents
around the airport. And now the owner of the national airline, the KLM Group,
along with four other airlines and the global trade body, which is the
International Air Transport Association, they're now suing the Dutch government
for it. So to make sense of all of this and the fallout of this news, earlier I
spoke with Aaron Karp, contributing editor to Aviation Week Network. This is
pretty unusual. And I think it shows just how concerned the airlines are that
their ability to grow at Amsterdam and particularly KLM, which operates 60% of
the flights at Schiphol, they're just so concerned that their growth levels will
stop. In 2019, there were 496,000 movements at Schiphol Airport. And the cap,
the initial cap that would go into effect in November, would bring that down to
460,000. You mentioned that Amsterdam's the third busiest airport in Europe.
According to Airports Council on National Europe, it's the most connected
airport from Europe, meaning there are more flights to more cities around the
world from Amsterdam than any other airport in Europe. So you can see what a
critical hub it is for the continent. But how concerning are the reasons given
behind this cap that has been lowered by the Dutch government? They've said it
is because there's a noise pollution, which the residents are facing, and also
because of the pollution levels. Yes, so the government is saying, look, our
main goal here is to reduce emissions and to reduce noise, particularly for the
residents around the airport. And the easiest way to do that is just to cut the
number of flights coming and going. And so I think they're balancing two
conflicting interests, wanting to continue growing the airport and wanting to
reduce emissions and noise. And I think you see this fight across Europe right
now. In France, there's a movement to move short haul airline flights to rail.
And you see a lot of pressure throughout Europe to crack down on airlines for
emissions and noise. But this is coming in at a time where the aviation industry
has faced a lot of troubles because of the lockdowns and restrictions around air
travel. They've just started to revive. The airport in question has been facing
financial troubles as well. So it's essentially pitting against financial
interests. Yes, and we should note that airport Schiphol itself, the airport, is
supporting the government's action. They acknowledge it will cause pain to
airlines, but they say this is a necessary step. So yeah, there's a lot of
competing interests here. A lot of competing interests. And Karp, their
contributing editor to Aviation Week Network. And when he was talking about
competing interests, and that's where I want to come to you, Zima, because on
one hand, you have energy security, which is required for a country like
Bangladesh, where people, as you said, could be facing long power cuts. It's
going to affect livelihoods. It's going to impact businesses. And it's going to
be a struggle to live in the heat that is so intense in the coming months. And
on the other hand, you have emission and coal-powered power plants, which are
generating lots of pollution. In fact, one study showed that air quality in
Bangladesh is at one of the worst, and it has reduced life expectancy by about
seven years. So it's a very difficult balance. Yeah, in fact, our power industry
contributes to about 55 or 60 percent of the greenhouse gas emissions that
Bangladesh is making at the moment. And all of these investments are being made
by countries which have pledged into renewable energy, like China. So we are
getting coal-powered power plants. We are getting diesel-powered power plants.
There is absolutely no conversation around renewable energy in Bangladesh, and
our renewable energy output is laughable, to say the least. But if you've ever
been to Dhaka, the air is actually pretty toxic. There's recently been a study
that said that Bangladesh has been suffering from—I mean, babies are being born
prematurely because of the air quality. And this is going to be going on at
least until 2030. Right now, that's the projection, that the air quality is not
going to get any better before 2030 because of the massive infrastructure
projects that are going on in the city. Would you support this kind of move,
then, when the government, at least in Netherlands, has cut down the number of
flights to help residents have cleaner air and also less noise-level pollution,
but the industry says it's going to impact the economy? I would definitely
support some moves like this. We need to pace out some of the infrastructural
development that we're doing. We cannot have them all together in five years.
That's not feasible for the health of people. That's interesting because,
Sergio, this has been a long-going conversation, especially because of the
diminishing Amazon forest in Colombia when it comes to urbanization and
development. There is a way that Colombia has tried to move around it through
carbon tax. Essentially, a levy of about $5 was introduced in companies that use
fossil fuels in 2016. Has that helped? Yes, that's correct. Companies that have
been using more carbon than others have been levied a tax. But at the same time,
we also have urban innovations such as plate restrictions allegedly to improve
urban air quality in different cities. But unfortunately, what's happened is
instead of abiding by the plate restrictions, what well-to-do people have done
is just to buy another car. Our congestion problem and our air quality problems
have, in fact, gotten worse, not better as the policies once intended. Zaima, in
Bangladesh, there is no carbon tax, but the carbon credit market is pretty
strong, basically, which allows owners like big polluting industries to emit a
certain amount of carbon dioxide or other greenhouse gases because one credit
permits emission of, say, about a ton of carbon dioxide. How popular is that
program and isn't it counterproductive then? Technically, yes, the program is
pretty popular. So the government does not actually levy a carbon tax on any
industry as such, although there are conversations about it. But right now, what
factories are doing, especially garments factories, more and more garments
factories are becoming green factories. They're becoming green. They're calling
themselves green factories, although they're not entirely running on renewable
energy. So what happens is that when they do something like this, they can ask
for carbon credits. And this concept is becoming more and more popular among
local industries, not so much among foreign direct investment coming into
Bangladesh. Interesting, because Sergio, Colombia actually sells carbon credit
to airlines companies. That's right. Yeah, several international organizations
have aligned with indigenous communities in the Amazon to be able to sell carbon
credits to large multinational corporations that are buying them. In fact,
there's been a report by Andres Bermudez-Liebano, a local reporter, who's been
tracking these carbon credits, and he finds that it's dubious at best that
communities get the best deal out of this possible. So I do think that there are
good intentioned efforts to improve community welfare through carbon credit and
income generation, but the jury's still out. Well, that's interesting. But can I
just shift gear here and just take you all to a different pitch altogether?
Sergio, do you like cricket? I'm confused by it. And what about you, Zeyma? Is
cricket as popular as it is in neighboring countries of Pakistan and India for
Bangladesh? Oh, our country runs on it. It's like the primary source of fuel.
Well, I can say it's nothing short of religion in India where I'm from. And
well, here's the big news this weekend. Well, this advertisement is all about
girls playing cricket in congested lanes in cities in India. And there are many
brands that are opting for this theme because this is the weekend where the
women's version of India's popular cricket franchise, the Indian Premier League,
is taking off. And it's interesting because there have been already comparisons
made between IPL, which used to have a men's series for at least 14 years before
they decided to flag up this women's tournament as well. Because Zeyma, I was
going through the broadcast rights itself. You look at how it was about $117
million media right for women's Indian Premier League for the next five years
compared to $3 billion for men's sport. I mean, this kind of disparity. Do you
see this when it comes to cricket in Bangladesh as well? Women's sports versus
women cricket? Women's sports or women's cricket is considered to be a novelty
item, whereas men's cricket, that's basically religion. Like you said, you'll
see them all over billboards. You'll see them everywhere. Women's cricket is, I
think it fulfills a diversity quota in Bangladesh. I mean, the social reality is
such that we men always played sports. I spent the last 22 years living beside
the biggest sporting field in my city, and I've never once played in it. I never
had the chance. My male friends used to go and play, and they used to show up at
my house afterwards for showers and snacks. But I was never given the chance.
Never given a chance because is sport or cricket not encouraged for girls?
Cricket is not encouraged for girls. They did not have... When you have a group
of guys playing, they wouldn't ask us to play, and there was no formal... They
didn't have any formal arrangements for girls to play. And only recently have we
been seeing women more and more into cricket, going to the field, running
around. I had to relearn how to run because that's something I had forgotten.
Something that we instinctively learn as a child. Women... I mean, at least I
forgot for at least a good 10 to 15 years. And this shows when it... Exactly. I
mean, this kind of... It shows... I know what you're saying about the cultural
upbringing as well for women because being from India, I know that sports for
women, especially outdoor sports, in many families, it's not encouraged because
I've heard things like, you would get tanned, you would get darker, who will
marry you, you will turn into like a man with manly shoulders and body. So it is
quite a stigma. But Sergio, let me bring you in. Are women allowed to play
sports in Colombia? And I know cricket is not popular, but what about football?
Absolutely, women are allowed. In fact, women are much better than the men in
terms of their international accolades. And I do know that the Colombian
football team just last December achieved a brilliant feat of getting into the
U17. They marched up right to the final. But when it comes to getting
recognition in terms of pay as well, is there a pay disparity? Because I was
just comparing the top player auction for the Indian Premier League and the
auctions are just pretty much like your European Premier League as well, the
Football Premier League. It was the top player, which is the Indian batter,
Spriti Mandana, got about $415,000. While for the men's, it was England all-
rounder Sam Curran, and he was picked up for $2.26 million. That's a lot of
difference. Yeah, absolutely. In Colombia, we do have a large pay disparity in
terms of women's sports and men's sports. And I think that that's all around the
world. I think Colombia is not necessarily an example of particularly egregious
behaviour. But I do think that our sports federations need to do a lot better to
improve women's sports and to also measure up to that equality level. Well, it's
always also the question of advertisers and sponsors. I was speaking earlier to
one of the advertising agency founders, Shraddha Garwal, who runs a digital
agency in India. And she told me about the fact that she's been trying to get ad
spots. And mostly for women cricket, it's a nice to have for many brands. They
want to be seen as supporting, as Zyma said, the diversity quota. But when it
comes to men's spots for ad, it's like must to have. And this is where the
viewership is. Is it a common story in Colombia, Sergio? Do you see this kind of
interest level difference and lack of sponsors as well? Well, to give you an
example, the men's player James Rodriguez was the number 10 for Real Madrid and
his jerseys were sold out in Colombia and absolutely everywhere. But just the
captain of the women's team who made runner up in the U-17 World Cup, who made
finalist in the Copa America in Brazil as well, Linda, she also is number 10 in
Real Madrid women's play now. And her shirt is not all over the place. So I do
think that there is a huge disparity. Linda Caicedo. And so I do think that
there's a huge disparity in terms of that. Well, Zyma, you're saying something
in hush tone. So let me get you in quickly on this story as we wrap this up,
that what can be done? Because from women commentators to journalists covering
women's sports to players and to even the sponsors who want to support women
teams and encourage them, it seems to be this entire cycle that needs to be
shaken up. What can be done and where can the start be made? I think they need
to start with the pay. The kind of reality that Sergio is telling me, it seems
like a dream for some of us, even with the disparities he's talking about. It
would be nice to have more of a cultural shift. Women cricketers, for example,
you were talking about IPL and just how much the difference was when it came to
the bids. Women cricketers here, they get paid eight times less than the men.
And what they're getting paid is essentially an entrance salary for anyone
entering the job market. That's all they're getting paid. So how is that fair?
And if you're going to be paying cricketers that little, they're not going to be
staying in the game for too long. You can't have a full time job and be a part
of the national team. But that's exactly what the cricketers here do. They have
a full time job and they're a part of the national team. Well, at least the
richest cricket body, which is the Board of Cricket Control of India, has said
last year that women cricketers will be paid the same match fee as their male
counterparts. But of course, it's a larger question of more support, more
encouragement and more socio cultural change. Well, I'm going to be watching
this women's IPL. I can tell you this, Sarja, I hope you tune in. Just to amuse
me, just please look at it and do share your views on how you find it. But let's
move on to another tune because it's time to change the beat. It's a rare 300
year old violin, which is going up for auction. And as we talked about it
earlier, well, Sarja, you may not buy it. Saima may buy it. If you have the
money, it could go up. The bids could go up to as much as 10 million dollars.
Nova Sappho is a reporter in New York from a sister program, Marketplace. He's
also a violinist, and he went to find out more. The old joke goes, how do you
get to Carnegie Hall? Practice, practice, practice. Well, just a couple of
blocks down from Carnegie Hall is Torezio, an auction house for rare stringed
instruments. It's in an unmarked high rise next to a crunch gym and a subway
sandwich shop. And many of the highly practiced violinists who play at Carnegie
Hall often stop by Torezio to check out the latest treasures. It makes me
nervous holding it. That's Carlos Tomei, Torezio's lead expert on historic
violins. I get emotional when I hold history like this. What Tomei is holding is
a nearly 300 year old violin made in Cremona, Italy by Giuseppe Guarneri del
Gesù. He's one of the two people considered the greatest violin makers in
history. You may have heard of the other one, Antonio Stradivari. The difference
between both of them is that Stradivari has made 600 known to us now
instruments, and there are only 150 of del Gesù. In other words, the violin in
his hand is one of very few in the world, and it makes a beautiful sound. So
this is the Guarneri del Gesù, and for some reason I'm allowed to touch it and
play it. My goodness, it's like going from a Camry to a Lamborghini. The
gentleman laughing is professional violinist Charles Yang, who just won two
Grammys, and Teresio asked him to stop by to demonstrate what the violin can
really do. Wow! I mean, I wish my bank account could buy this. I would do it
right now. So considering the demand from all of those talented violinists out
there, and how much they're willing to shell out for a great sounding
instrument, why not just replicate a Guarneri, reverse engineer it, and make
thousands and thousands of copies for everyone who wants one? We know exactly
how they were made because a lot of these tools and materials have survived over
the years. That's David Bonzi, a violin maker and restorer of old instruments.
He has a separate shop not far away from Teresio. Bonzi says that modern-day
violin makers know all the basics of how Guarneri and Stradivarius violins were
made, but the devil is in the details. What we don't know is what was inside
their heads. When they made these instruments, they had no benefit of science.
They were only going on their intuition and what was traditionally done, what
was taught to them. And despite CT scans, chemical analysis, multiple scientific
studies, violin makers today can't definitively replicate the secret sauce of
the great masters to replicate how their creations sound. In the meantime, we're
stuck with a limited supply of the old greats. And Teresio's Carlos Tomei says
demand keeps growing. We've seen how they've become an alternative asset for
many people. So the prices are going fast and high. They're appreciating a lot.
In fact, if the violin coming up for auction fetches $10 million, it won't even
set a record. Teresio sold another for $16 million more than a decade ago. Wow,
that's a lot of money. That was Nova Sappho from our sister program Marketplace.
So Sergio, he said in the story, one person said that it's Lamborghini of
violence. We've been having some chat in the studio about whether it's worth the
price or not. But anyways, we're amateurs. But you've actually played the role
of auctioneer, which is very important in this business of auction because it's
about finding that pulse of your audience, which wants to buy more and edging
them higher. Yes, I participated as an auctioneer in a date auction a long time
ago in Washington. So not the type of rare goods that your violinists are
fetching. A date is rare in those parts of the world. But were you able to get
the bidding prices up? Oh, it was for charity. So yes, we would try to get
people to be as generous as they can. Well, Zima, when you think about auction,
I mean, I was reading about this, that it requires an auction fear where people
want to just outdo each other. It's part of a social analysis that we all live
in a social experiment as well. Have you been to an auction? And how do you find
this business of auction? I've not been to an auction before, but I would
absolutely buy that violin if I had that money, which I don't. I'm a journalist.
But we all have an individual responsibility to conserve history. And that's how
I see it. That knowledge, that violin needs to be conserved. And why not take on
the responsibility of doing that? I personally learned how to play music on a
harmonium that's nearly 80 years old at this point. That's my most prized
possession, an 80 year old harmonium. Wow. So there you go. Well, it would be
worth billions someday, hopefully, if you have the right auctioneer like Sergio.
Who knows? Who knows which buttons they can press about this? Let's just hope my
descendants don't sell it. But thank you so much, Sergio and Zima for joining
us. It's been wonderful speaking to both of you on this conversation on business
matters. And if you've been listening, thank you for being with us. It's been
wonderful having you here. Do tell us about what you like about the program,
what you don't like also, and what you would like us to talk about on
world.business at bbc.co.uk. Also do check out our podcast, just search for
Business Matters wherever you get your podcasts. It's Devina Gupta saying
Namaste. This is the BBC World Service examining the challenges we face from
long COVID. You'll be hearing from scientists trying to unravel the cause of the
condition and finding out what the latest research on some sufferers is showing.
When we exercise participants just for six minutes and we do blood tests. We are
making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third party
services and platforms. And the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC sounds.