TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at Midnight. This is Charles Carroll. MPs investigating statements
Boris Johnson made about lockdown parties say he may have misled the Commons
repeatedly. The Chancellor is expected to extend government support for
households with their fuel bills. Two of the biggest health unions have called
off planned ambulance strikes in England and Wales after ministers agreed to
discuss pay for this year. A ferry is stranded in the Channel after a fire broke
out in the engine room. President Biden has had a cancerous skin lesion removed.
And the cost of a first class stamp is going up to £1.10. The cross-party
committee of MPs that's investigating whether Boris Johnson misled the Commons
over government lockdown parties has said evidence indicates he may have done so
on four occasions. The MPs have published an interim report setting out their
findings so far before they question the former Prime Minister later this month.
Mr Johnson insisted it was clear from the report that he had not committed any
contempt of Parliament. He also said people might view Sue Gray's investigation
into Whitehall rule-breaking in a different light now the former civil servant
had been offered a job by Labour. Here's our political correspondent David
Wallace-Lockhart. The Privileges Committee is looking into accusations that
Boris Johnson misled the House of Commons when he assured MPs that all Covid
rules were followed in Downing Street during the pandemic. In an update today
the committee said there was evidence that MPs may have been misled on a number
of occasions and that the evidence strongly suggests that Covid breaches would
have been obvious to Mr Johnson when he attended certain events. Critics
including the leader of the Liberal Democrats Sir Ed Davey want to see the
former Prime Minister face consequences. No one is going to be surprised that
Boris Johnson knew he was lying. It's pretty clear that he knew that he was
misleading Parliament and he's lied about knowing that he misled Parliament.
He's still doing it. This is a person who doesn't know the truth and frankly I
hope the full penalties and sanctions of Parliament are put upon him for having
misled the country. But Mr Johnson insists the committee hasn't seen anything
that shows he knew rules were being broken and therefore he's vindicated. I
didn't mislead the House and I believe that what we were doing was within the
rules. That's why I said what I said to Parliament and I think what's so
interesting about the report today is that after 10 months of effort they found
absolutely no evidence to suggest otherwise. One investigation into Partygate
was undertaken by the former civil servant Sue Gray who is in the process of
accepting a job as Chief of Staff to the Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer. She
found multiple breaches of Covid rules within government and described failures
of leadership and judgment at Number 10 and the Cabinet Office. Boris Johnson
said that people could draw their own conclusions about her motives when she
wrote her report. People will make up their own minds about this and I think
that if you told me at the time I commissioned Sue Gray all the stuff that I now
know I might have invited her to reflect on whether she was really the the right
person to do it. Sir Keir Starmer said the evidence against Boris Johnson was
damning. He defended the conduct of Sue Gray and stressed she was the kind of
public service he wanted in his corner. As we look forward I hope we can change
from this failure of the last 13 years to an incoming Labour government and in
that I'm delighted that really strong professional respected individuals are now
wanting to be part of that future. The investigation into Boris Johnson's
comments in Parliament has yet to reach its final conclusions. The former Prime
Minister is expected to give evidence later this month. The Chancellor Jeremy
Hunt is expected to extend government support for household energy bills in
England, Scotland and Wales for a further three months. Typical home energy
costs had been due to rise to £3,000 a year from April but they're now likely to
stay at around £2,500. A separate rebate scheme is ending. Here's our business
editor Simon Jack. The energy price guarantee has seen the government subsidise
the cost of gas and electricity so that a household with average usage pays
£2,500 a year. Plans to scale back that support and let bills rise to £3,000 are
expected to be shelved and as the BBC revealed energy companies are preparing
customers bills for April assuming there will be no increase. Charities and
consumer campaigners have welcomed the expected move as they have argued
allowing bills to rise in under a month could have dire consequences. Martin
Lewis is the founder of the money saving expert website. It's not good for
individuals to put prices up, it's not good for people's mental health, it's not
good for consumer confidence which means it's bad for business and it would also
keep the inflation rate down if we don't put prices up. It's a bit of a no-
brainer. Prices will still rise for most households as a £400 discount that was
paid in monthly instalments from October is expected to be phased out. A big
factor in the government's change of heart is a sharp fall in the price of
wholesale gas. When the price guarantee was announced in September last year
prices were breaking records during a worldwide scramble for energy as Russian
suppliers were shunned or shut off. With prices 70% or so lower now the Treasury
has spent tens of billions of pounds less on subsidies than it originally
thought it would and it hopes that by July it won't have to subsidise bills at
all as experts predict the average cost for households will drop beneath £2,500
a year. Two of the biggest health unions, the GMB and Unison, have called off
ambulance strikes planned for the next week in England and Wales after agreeing
to fresh talks about pay. Another union, Unite, which represents 4,000 ambulance
workers has rejected the offer. Our health correspondent Dominic Hughes reports.
The main unions that represent health workers including the GMB and Unison as
well as the Royal Colleges of Nursing and Midwives have spent much of the day
consulting their members and each other on whether to accept an offer of fresh
negotiations. What are described as intensive talks will start early next week
on the understanding there will be an offer of fresh money for this year's pay
award as well as new money for next year. Strikes by GMB and Unison ambulance
and other health workers scheduled for next week as well as action planned by
members of the Charter Society of Physiotherapy have now been paused. Unite, the
smallest of the three ambulance unions, said its strike on March 6th would still
go ahead as planned, describing government preconditions for talks as
unreasonable. But this could be the beginning of a breakthrough that sees an end
to a dispute that has rumbled on since December and has seen the appointments of
tens of thousands of patients disrupted. But much will depend on what ministers
can bring to the table and what the unions think their members will accept. A
teaching union in Scotland has called off planned strike action after receiving
a new pay offer from the Holyrood government. The Educational Institute of
Scotland will now hold a ballot on the deal. It's urging its members to accept
the offer. A court in Belarus has sentenced last year's Nobel Peace Prize winner
to 10 years in prison. Alias Belyatsky, who's 60, was convicted of smuggling
money into the country and financing the protest group he'd founded, charges
which he denies. He was arrested in 2021 after mass demonstrations took place
following the presidential election, in which Alexander Lukashenko secured his
sixth term in office. Our Russia editor Steve Rosenberg has been following the
story. Mr. Belyatsky is the founder of Vyazna, a leading human rights
organization in Belarus. His deputy, Valiantin Stefanovich, was on trial with
him. He was jailed for nine years. An activist, Oleg Zemelapkovich, was handed a
seven-year prison term. They were found guilty of economic crimes and of funding
protests. The case against them is widely seen as politically motivated. Vyazna
has been monitoring and documenting human rights abuses in Belarus, as the
country's authoritarian leader, Alexander Lukashenko, has been suppressing
dissent and cracking down on civil society. According to Vyazna, there are
currently 1,458 political prisoners in Belarus. The Belarusian authorities claim
there are none. A man and a woman have been remanded in custody after appearing
in court charged with the manslaughter of a baby. The remains of the child,
named in court papers as Victoria, were found in a shed in East Sussex earlier
this week. Our correspondent, Duncan Kennedy, was at Crawley Magistrates' Court.
Mark Gordon and Constance Martin were brought into the courtroom, both dressed
in grey tracksuits. A court official asked them to give their names and dates of
birth. Both also said they were of no fixed abode. The three charges against
them were then read out. They are of manslaughter, concealing the birth of a
child, and perverting the course of justice. The two defendants were not asked
to enter a plea to any of the charges. The court was told that the remains of
the baby were found in a locked shed. They were inside a plastic bag under some
nappies. Court documents gave the name of the baby as Victoria. Constance Martin
and Mark Gordon were remanded in custody and will next appear at the Old Bailey
in London at the end of this month. An operation has been taking place in the
Channel this evening after a small fire broke out on a ferry with more than 180
people on board. The Isle of Innisfree was midway through its journey from Dover
to Calais when the blaze began. It's since been extinguished, but the Coast
Guard says the ferry is experiencing technical difficulties. Simon Jones has the
latest from Dover. The fire broke out at around half past five this afternoon in
the engine room of the ferry. At one point, the passengers on board were told to
go to muster points in case the ship had to be evacuated. Three lifeboats were
sent to the scene, along with a French tug. Irish Ferries, which operates the
Isle of Innisfree, said the crew managed to put out the fire and all 94
passengers and 89 crew members had been accounted for. It added that no
emergency assistance was likely to be needed. The ferry is now at anchor mid-
channel, but it may need to be towed back to shore so those on board face a long
night ahead. The White House has revealed that President Biden had a cancerous
skin lesion successfully removed from his chest last month. His doctor says no
further treatment is needed. Here's our Washington correspondent, Nomia Iqbal.
When the president had his regular physical check-up last month, his doctor,
Kevin O'Connor, removed what he called a small lesion on Mr Biden's chest. The
tissue was sent for a biopsy the same day. The results confirmed that it was
basal cell cancer, which does not tend to spread as other more serious skin
cancers do. Dr O'Connor said it had healed well and the 80-year-old president
would continue to be monitored as part of his ongoing health care. In January,
the first lady, Jill Biden, had surgery to remove two cancerous skin lesions.
The former England cricket captain, Michael Vaughan, has denied allegations that
he made racist comments towards the former Yorkshire player, Azim Rafiq. He's
been giving evidence to the Cricket Discipline Commission, which is
investigating claims of racism at Yorkshire County Cricket Club. Our sports
editor, Dan Rowan, was at the hearing. Michael Vaughan returned to a
disciplinary hearing today as the former England captain began his defence
against an ECB charge over an alleged racist comment his ex-Yorkshire teammate,
Azim Rafiq, claims he made before a match in 2009. Rafiq alleges that Vaughan
said, ''Too many of you lot. We need to have a word about that,'' to him and
three other Asian players. Vaughan, who denies the claim, agreed such a comment
would be unacceptable but that it was inconceivable that he'd said the words
because it would have risked affecting his teammate's performance. ''I have a
very clear mind,'' he said, ''that I know I didn't say the words I've been
alleged to have said. I can't apologise for something I don't recollect
saying.'' He added the scandal had been ''a terrible look for the game.'' Jane
Mulcahy, KC, counsel for the ECB, asked Vaughan about some historical tweets
he'd posted, including one about the lack of English people in London and for
which he'd previously apologised, suggesting they were evidence of his views. He
accepted they were disgusting and said he'd taken an online diversity course to
educate himself. Earlier, Vaughan's lawyer, Chris Stoner, KC, had questioned the
thoroughness of the ECB's investigation, saying it had made assumption after
assumption in the decision to charge his client. The hearing will continue next
week. The price of a first-class stamp is to rise above £1 for the first time.
Royal Mail says the cost will increase by 15p next month to £1.10. Here's our
business correspondent, Emma Simpson. Royal Mail said it recognised that many
households were facing challenging times, but the changes were necessary because
of the increasing costs of delivering posts six days a week for a universal
price across the UK. It's also facing a 25% drop in the amount of letters being
sent since the pandemic. The business is losing about £1m a day. It's been hit
by a wave of strike action in a long-running and costly dispute with a
communication workers' union over pay and conditions. But the rise has been
criticised by Citizens Advice, who said the price of a first-class stamp had
increased by 64% in five years and nobody should be paying more for what it
described as a subpar service, where millions had missed important letters as a
result of postal delays. A woman in Belgium who murdered her five children has
been killed at her own request. Genevieve Lernmiet's lawyer said that his client
had chosen to die on the 16th anniversary of her crime. Our Europe correspondent
Jessica Parker reports from Belgium. It was a case that shocked the country. In
2007, while the children's father was away, Genevieve Lernmiet murdered her son
and four daughters in Nivelles, an area south of Brussels. She then tried and
failed to take her own life and ended up calling the emergency services. She was
sentenced to life in prison before being moved to a psychiatric hospital in
2019. Now aged 56, it's emerged that Genevieve Lernmiet died earlier this week,
exactly 16 years on from the crime. Belgian law allows people to choose to be
euthanised under certain circumstances, including if they're in a condition of
constant and unbearable suffering, either mental or physical, that cannot be
alleviated. The authorities say nearly 3,000 people died through euthanasia in
Belgium last year, with cancer the most common reason. The UK has dismissed
fresh calls from Argentina to open negotiations about the sovereignty of the
Falkland Islands. The Argentine government made the demand after it withdrew
from an economic agreement with the UK at a meeting this week of the G20 group
of nations. The dispute about the British overseas territory in the South
Atlantic continues to strain relations between the UK and Argentina 41 years
after they went to war over the islands. Here's our diplomatic correspondent,
Paul Adams. The Falklands issue is never far from the surface when British and
Argentine ministers meet, but officials say they were surprised when it
dominated yesterday's talks in Delhi. Argentina's foreign minister, Santiago
Cafiero, said his government no longer wanted to abide by a 2016 agreement in
which the two governments set aside their differences over the Falklands in
order to improve relations on trade, security and other issues. In a series of
tweets, Mr Cafiero said his government wanted fresh negotiations over the future
of the islands, which Argentina calls Las Malvinas. Mr Cleveley's response was a
polite but firm rebuff. In his own tweet, he said the Falkland Islands were
British and the islanders had chosen to remain a self-governing UK overseas
territory. It's not clear quite why Argentina has chosen this moment to take a
tougher stance, but the issue which drove the two countries to war 41 years ago
remains highly emotive in Argentina, and in seven months' time the country goes
to the polls to elect a new president. A prominent local lawyer in the US state
of South Carolina has been given two consecutive life sentences for killing his
wife and son. Alex Murdoch is also facing multiple further charges for alleged
financial crimes. As our Washington correspondent Carrie O'Donoghue reports, the
case has attracted huge media interest. This is the fall of a dynasty, it's a
fall from grace. I do believe that Alec Murdoch would kill Paula Maggie. This
gruesome family tragedy has already spawned two separate television miniseries.
For decades, the Murdochs have held key prosecutor roles in several counties,
and their private law firm was regarded as almost as powerful as law enforcement
itself. But two years ago, with financial pressures mounting, Alec Murdoch
brutally murdered his wife and son on their 1,700-acre property. During
sentencing, Judge Clifton Newman strongly suggested he'd be imposing a death
penalty if prosecutors hadn't taken it off the table. Murdoch remained defiant.
I'm innocent. I would never, under any circumstances, hurt my wife Maggie, and I
would never, under any circumstances, hurt my son Paul Paul. The prosecution
said Murdoch committed the murders in an attempt to generate sympathy at a time
when his life was falling apart, with allegations that he'd stolen huge sums
from clients, partly to feed a drug habit. What fatally undermined Murdoch's
case was that he had to admit he'd lied about the last time he'd seen his wife
and son alive. That emerged in dramatic fashion when a video from his dead son's
phone, taken minutes before the murders, was played to the court, with Murdoch's
voice clearly on it. Hey, he's got burns in his mouth. Baba. Hey, Baba. The
fascination with the case has captivated a nation already enthralled to the true
crime genre. That has all been infinitely magnified by televised court
proceedings, and the substantial latitude for comment and discussion of ongoing
criminal matters afforded by American law. The reality TV personality Stephen
Bear has been jailed for 21 months by Chelmsford Crown Court for posting video
footage of him having sex with his ex-girlfriend Georgia Harrison on an adult
website. Ms Harrison, who has appeared on programmes including The Only Way is
Essex, said she welcomed the sentence. Our correspondent Frances Reid reports.
Stephen Bear gained a level of fame from first appearing on the reality show
Shipwrecked, then going on to win Celebrity Big Brother in 2016. In 2020, the
33-year-old posted a private video of him having sex with his former girlfriend
Georgia Harrison on OnlyFans, a site where users can pay to watch adult content.
Ms Harrison, who has appeared on TV shows like Love Island, says she had no idea
she was being recorded by Bear's CCTV. She subsequently asked him not to share
the footage. He was found guilty of voyeurism, as well as of disclosing private
sexual photographs and films with intent to cause distress. He was also given a
restraining order to not contact Ms Harrison for five years. She waived her
right to anonymity and spoke to reporters outside the court. I hope that this
puts anyone off committing this sort of crime, and I hope for anyone else who's
been victim of it, it gives them some sort of justice. Intimate image abuse,
also known as revenge porn, has been an offence in the UK since October 2015.
The term relates to sharing intimate videos of someone without their consent for
the purpose of causing distress. The domestic abuse charity Refuge says one in
seven women receives threats to share intimate images, many are from ex-
partners. Ruth Davison is its CEO. This is a good but unfortunately unusual
outcome in this case today. The victim shaming and the minimisation of this kind
of crime I think prevents even more women from coming forward. Campaigners say
there should now be tighter restrictions from tech companies and tougher laws to
reduce the number of women who experience such online abuse. An independent
panel has recommended that the MP Neil Coyle should be suspended from the House
of Commons for five days for making abusive and racist comments while drunk in a
Commons bar. Mr Coyle sits as an independent after losing the Labour whip. He's
apologised unreservedly for his behaviour. And the MP Rupa Huck has been
readmitted to the Labour Party five months after she was suspended for comments
she made about Kwasi Kwarteng. Ms Huck had described the former Conservative
Chancellor as superficially black. She later apologised. The South African
Paralympic athlete Oscar Pistorius, who was jailed in 2014 for the murder of his
girlfriend, is to attend a parole hearing at the end of this month. Pistorius,
known as the Blade Runner because of his carbon fibre prosthetics, has served
half of his 15-year sentence. Our Africa correspondent Andrew Harding reports
from Johannesburg. It's just over a decade since Oscar Pistorius fired shots at
his bathroom door late at night, killing his girlfriend Reva Steenkamp.
Throughout his long televised trial, the Paralympic athlete insisted he thought
he was shooting at an intruder. And then I heard a noise from inside the toilet.
Before I knew it, I'd fired four shots at the door. She wasn't breathing. But an
appeal court eventually ruled that he must have intended to kill someone, and so
a manslaughter conviction was changed to murder. Having served half his
sentence, Pistorius is now eligible for parole. His case will be heard at the
end of this month. As part of South Africa's restorative justice programme,
Pistorius met Reva Steenkamp's father last year. But the Steenkamps continue to
insist Pistorius killed their daughter deliberately, and say they oppose parole.
Pistorius is now 36 years old and is being held at a small prison outside the
city of Pretoria. In the city, the 100 share index ended the day up three points
at 7,947. On Wall Street, the Dow Jones closed up 387 points at 33,391. And on
the currency markets, the pound is trading at $1.20.1. Against the euro,
sterling is at 1.13, which makes a euro worth 88.5 pence. Lewis Hamilton has
been given permission to wear his nose studs during races, despite a ban on
Formula One drivers wearing jewellery in their cars. Hamilton was forced to
comply with the rules last season when he had only one stud, but he's been
granted a medical exemption after saying removing the stud had caused an
infection, and doctors had warned that he risked disfigurement if he did so
again. He's since added a piercing in his right nostril to the one in his left.
Now a look at the morning papers, the front pages of which are dominated by the
interim report on Boris Johnson. The Times says the former Prime Minister is now
fighting for his political career. According to the paper, senior parliamentary
sources believe the report is so strong, Mr Johnson could be suspended from the
Commons for more than a month, meaning he might have to face a by-election. The
Guardian also says he's battling for his parliamentary future. The Mirror's
front page headline is Parties, He Knew. It says the report makes clear that the
breaches in social distancing rules at government lockdown gatherings would have
been obvious to Mr Johnson. But the Daily Mail highlights Mr Johnson's claim
that there is no evidence to support allegations he misled MPs, and that same
view is taken by the Daily Express, which says Mr Johnson insisted that the
interim report vindicated him. There's no mention of the story at all on the
front page of the Daily Telegraph, which instead has more details from the cache
of WhatsApp messages leaked to it concerning the former Health Secretary Matt
Hancock. The latest messages show Mr Hancock and his advisors agonised for hours
about whether or not he had broken Covid rules, after photos were published
showing him kissing his aide Gina Coladangelo. Our political correspondent Ione
Wells has been reading through them. These WhatsApp messages reveal the chaotic
scramble in the hours that followed the publication of a photograph showing Matt
Hancock kissing his aide. His advisor asks him to think very hard about whether
he could have broken any rules. Mr Hancock seeks clarification about what
exactly the Covid guidance was at the time the photograph was taken. He says
that he can't think of rules that were broken other than the guidance to keep a
metre or more away from others. Talking about the coverage, he adds the worst
the press can do is say he and his aide kissed before they legalised hugs. Mr
Hancock also discusses workplace guidance that staff should maintain social
distancing wherever possible. His advisor points out that the photograph clearly
shows it was possible. The messages show they were aware he could have breached
guidance, but that he and his advisor were trying to find ways to justify his
behaviour. The then health secretary eventually resigned the day after the photo
appeared in the sun. Matt Hancock's team say the publication of the messages is
highly intrusive and inappropriate. Ken Bruce has presented his final show on
BBC Radio 2. He started at the station in 1984 and made his mid-morning
programme the most listened to radio show in the UK. Signing off, he said the
BBC was still the finest broadcasting corporation in the world, aside from what
he called the occasional vagary. He went on to thank his listeners. A lot of
people would say, oh write down a big speech and deliver it. No, that's not the
sort of thing I do. I do really just want to say thank you to everybody who has
contributed in any, any small way to this programme, particularly the listeners.
You know, I really couldn't do it without listeners who contribute and complete
the dialogue. We talk to each other on a daily basis and I hope maybe sometime
in the future we may be able to continue doing that. The political cartoonist
Wally Fawkes, known as Trog, has died aged 98. Trog created the Flook strip,
which ran in the Daily Mail for more than 35 years until 1985, before working
for the Observer and the Sunday Telegraph. He was named political cartoonist of
the year in 2004. Arctic Monkeys and Guns N' Roses have been revealed as the
headline acts for this year's Glastonbury Festival. The organisers had already
announced that Sir Elton John would top the bill on the third day of the event
as part of his farewell tour. Our music correspondent Mark Savage has been
looking at the line-up. This will be Guns N' Roses' debut at Glastonbury and
Arctic Monkeys' third time as headliners. But the biggest attraction is bound to
be Elton John in what could be his last ever UK show. Organiser Emily Eves says
she made a personal approach to get him to play. I actually wrote him a letter
and I said if it never happens again, it would be such a failure on all of our
parts. And he just called up and said yes. All three of this year's headliners
are male artists, an awkward position for a festival that's pledged to achieve
gender balance across its line-up. Culture writer Hannah Ewans says it reflects
a wider problem. The music industry, particularly the British music industry,
just doesn't support female artists in the way they should be. And I think
that's a problem that's just not there. I think there's just not that kind of
nurturing that takes artists from pretty exciting three-year career into those
kind of legacy acts. In the UK, only 20% of the artists signed to record labels
are female. At Glastonbury, representation is much higher, at 48%. We obviously
aim for 50-50. Some years it's more, some years it's less. I mean, next year
it's looking like we've got two female headliners. This year we did have one and
she unfortunately had to pull out. And there are female acts getting big slots.
The US pop star Lizzo will play immediately before Guns N' Roses. And Lana Del
Rey will headline the festival's second biggest stage on Saturday night.
Glastonbury opens its gates on Wednesday, the 21st of June. The BBC News. Which
was run by Charles Carroll. In a couple of minutes, our Book of the Week, A Tomb
with a View by Peter Ross continues. But first, a look at the weather forecast
for the next 24-48 hours and beyond. Penrich. Hello there. The weather is set to
turn a little colder as we head through the weekend. That said, temperatures on
Friday were not particularly impressive. Gosport in Hampshire was the mildest
place with a high of 9.7 Celsius. And at Senebridge in Powys, temperatures
climbed no higher than 2.2 Celsius. There wasn't a lot of rain around.
Altsnahinch in County Antrim saw 3.4 millimetres of rain. There wasn't a lot of
sunshine either in many places. However, Braemar in Aberdeenshire did manage 8.2
hours of blue sky overhead. But as we head through the rest of the night, most
places will stick with a lot of cloud. Where we do see some clear spells across
parts of southern Scotland, northern England, perhaps Wales, perhaps elsewhere
as well. We could just see a touch of frost, but where it stays cloudy,
temperatures are likely to remain around freezing or just above. And then as we
head into Saturday, the forecast is pretty much the same wherever you are across
the UK. There will be a lot of cloud. Best chance of sunshine, I think, will be
around some western parts, western Scotland, northwest England, Wales, perhaps
Northern Ireland as well. Equally, the cloud will be thick enough to produce
some showers in places, especially in the north and the east of Scotland and
across the eastern side of England. Temperatures will be about where they have
been through the week, between six and nine degrees in most places. Saturday
night's another largely cloudy night with some spots of rain and drizzle, some
showers in places, particularly, I think, in the north of Scotland. And for
Sunday, we will generally see more showers developing across the UK. And as the
air turns a little bit colder, some of those showers will start to turn wintry
over high ground in the north of the UK. Sunday's temperatures generally between
four and seven degrees. But into the start of next week, quite a dramatic
change. Things will turn much colder from the north, and it will be cold enough
for some snow in places, some ice as well, and feeling particularly chilly in a
brisk wind. Ben, thank you. Ben Rich at the BBC Weather Centre. Now on Radio 4,
the final part of our Book of the Week, a tomb with a view. As the popularity of
burial declines, Peter Ross visits a cemetery in Bristol, taking a bold approach
to survival. The reader is Andy Clark. It was Halloween, and I was in Arnosvale
for Liz and Sean's wedding. This burial ground opened in Bristol in 1839, and is
perhaps the finest Victorian garden cemetery outside of London. It's also the
best example of a 19th century graveyard being repurposed for the 21st century,
reborn as a place of leisure and pleasure. At one side of the gates was a
billboard advertising a forthcoming theatre production of Jekyll and Hyde. On
the other were hoardings noting the availability of burial space, coffee and
cake. A blackboard outside the visitor centre listed that day's wildlife
sightings, a cat, two bats, a peregrine falcon above the tomb of Rajah Ramahan
Roy. Is this place the future of graveyards? The 45-acre site is home to around
290,000 dead, and the cemetery is synonymous in this city with the life beyond
life. I'll see thee down Arnosvale, is a typical line from Bristolians of a
certain vintage, said with a smile but serious too, meaning that the speaker and
the friend would end their days in the same ground. There are worse places.
Although it's bigger than Highgate Cemetery in London, Arnosvale feels much more
compact. On either side of the entrance on Bath Road are two small neoclassical
gatehouses. One is now the cemetery reception and shop. Wander a little further
in and you'll arrive at the real treasure, two chapels, one Anglican, the other
nonconformist, both grade 2 listed. Sean and Liz had booked a nonconformist
chapel for the reception, though the ceremony itself was to be elsewhere in the
grounds. The cemetery has been a marriage venue since 2014 and it hosts around
40 each year. The coordinator is a young woman called Buffy. She gets a lot of
goths. Wedding photographs taken at Arnosvale tend to feature tattoos, black
cakes, motorbikes. One couple walked down the aisle to Iron Maiden. Brides have
been known to arrive by hearse. I was a little early so I visited the chapel.
The room where the reception was to be held looked gorgeous, elegant and full of
light, the table dressed with gourds and ivy. Immediately below and accessible
to the public was the site of the former crematorium. Between 1928 and the
discontinuation of the service in 1998, 123,000 people were cremated down there.
The area is used now to tell the story of Arnosvale, but one of the great ovens
is still there. It's a rusty brown colour. Across the way is the atomiser, a
glass-fronted machine full of wheels and belts which was used to grind the
cremated remains into ash. Liz Webb and Sean McHale live in Bristol. He's 32,
she's 29. Liz grew up nearby and she's known the cemetery since childhood.
They're not goths or pagans, although Liz admits to witchy vibes. They're just
regular folks who are into Halloween. The presence of the dead doesn't bother
them. Arnosvale is owned by Bristol City Council, managed and leased by the
Cemetery Trust. It has annual running costs of around half a million pounds. To
meet these without local authority funding, the cemetery is used for a variety
of purposes, including, of course, burial. Some of the activities might have
surprised the Victorians. Weddings, for one, but also film screenings, the Lost
Boys, Corpse Bride, etc. They're held in the Anglican Chapel. There's an annual
festival called Life, Death and the Rest, which is intended to bust taboos
around dying. On the day of my visit, the crypt had been taken over by the
city's Mexican community for Dia de los Muertos. It was turned into an ofrenda,
an altar covered in food offerings, bright skull decorations and photos of the
deceased. It's a matter of instinct and debate to ensure that the integrity and
atmosphere of the cemetery isn't compromised. Perhaps it's easier to sustain an
artsy, liberal, hipsterish Bristol than it would be in some other cities. Janine
Marriott is the public engagement manager. She tells me it's a constant question
discussed by the Trust and the staff and the friends and the public, is this
appropriate? For instance, she said, when certain films have been proposed,
Psycho, we decided, was a step too far. Someone else wanted to do a talk on
necrophilia. We said no to that as well. Janine sees the cemetery as a sacred
space, but also a heritage space, and insists that the two aren't at odds. She
argues that councils haven't got the funds, so they're never going to care for a
historic cemetery over a nursing home, or a museum, or a sports centre. So some
kind of income generating activity is vital. The model at Arnist Vale relies
heavily upon volunteers. Among the regulars is Howard Utting, although he's more
like a patron saint. He's the guru of the graveyard. He's 76, with long grey
hair, a long grey beard, and a long association with Arnist Vale. Howard's
grandfather, William Utting, was the superintendent, responsible for running the
cemetery from 1908. His father, Alfred, born in the cemetery in 1910, eventually
took over the superintendent role. Howard was a true child of the graveyard. He
lived here until he married at 31. Arnist Vale was his playground. He'd ride his
bike along the paths, climb across graves to reach the best conkers, share the
sammages of the grave diggers. As the family grew, the Uttings settled in the
East Lodge, to the left of the main gates as you come in. These days, on
Fridays, Howard mans the reception desk of what used to be his living room. From
the window he can see his parents' grave. Howard didn't go into the family
business. He became a postman. Still, growing up in a graveyard shaped him in
several important ways. It made him realise that you can't take your money with
you, so what's the point of grasping for it and exploiting others to get it?
Even more significantly, he understood and accepted the inevitability of death
at an age when most kids were having trouble accepting the inevitability of
school. He remembers being sent out to tell his dad it was time to come in for
dinner, and finding him in one of the chapels, closing up for the night. We were
standing at the altar. My father said to me, life's like that candle. If you're
lucky, you'll burn all the way down. He licked his thumb and forefinger and
pinched the wick. Life can be snuffed out, he said, but tomorrow I'll light the
flame again. Arnisfield is alive. The weddings, the funerals, the tours and
talks keep its pulse steady. Things could easily have been very different. If
not for the determination of locals, I might have found the gates padlocked and
the graveyard dead. The cemetery had been in decline since the late 1950s, and
in 1987 it came into the ownership of a businessman who announced that he wanted
to build 400 houses on a seven acre section of the grounds. Families were asked
to consider exhuming and removing the remains of their relations. This caused
widespread outrage and inspired a long campaign which would, in its quietly
determined British way, revolutionise the way Arnisfield was owned and run.
Joyce Smith, together with her husband Richard, was one of the leaders of that
campaign. Now in her mid-70s, she explained why she'd first got involved. It was
personal. Her father had died only a couple of years before and been buried at
Arnisfield. My mother rang me up and said, I'm going to dig everybody up and
clear the cemetery. What shall we do about Daddy? Joyce replied, well we're not
going to do anything about him because he's not going to be dug up. A
campaigning group was formed to resist the development plans. Things came to a
head in 1998 when the crematorium failed to meet new environmental guidelines
and its license expired. The owner announced that he could no longer keep the
cemetery open and attempted to lock the gates. He was prevented from doing so by
a crowd of around 200 locals who came to be known as the Arnisfield Army. They
established a caravan just outside the main entrance and for several years made
sure the cemetery was open in the morning for those visiting graves and locked
up in the evening to protect it from intruders. There followed a series of legal
battles, first to establish the right of the Arnisfield Army to be there and
then in defence of Bristol City Council's compulsory purchase order. This went
to the High Court in London and in 2003 the council, now the owners of
Arnisfield, licensed the new cemetery trust to manage it. Joyce and Richard
Smith found themselves in charge of a graveyard that had one foot in the grave.
We were so close to real disaster, Joyce told me. The West Lodge was the worst.
The staircase was gone, it was damp, rot everywhere and the roof was leaking. It
was only the spider webs holding it up. Richard Smith had been running an office
out of the back of his car but eventually they managed to clear out a corner of
the non-conformist chapel and install that invaluable item, a kettle. Tea could
be made and with a little tea progress could be made. The resurrection of
Arnisfield was steaming ahead. Money helped. The trust was awarded a 4.82
million heritage lottery fund grant. This was to pay for the restoration of the
buildings but funds were still required for the day-to-day running of the
cemetery. Joyce started giving tours. It was a real wartime effort, she laughed,
but people came. That was the amazing part. People wanted to see the cemetery. I
found it so uplifting. I was inspired by everybody's support. Richard Smith died
in 2009. His ashes are buried in one of the Gardens of Rest. A plaque in the
cemetery pays tribute to his passion, commitment and leadership. The main route
through Arnisfield is known as Richard's Road. Sean and Liz were getting married
in the Underwood Centre, up a steep winding path through the trees. It was in a
part of the cemetery where, during Howard Utting's childhood, the horse and cart
were kept. Now it was an outdoor wedding venue. The ceremony would take place
inside what looked like a deconstructed barn. A steep roof but open on all
sides. This had been decorated with bunting, lights, candles, autumn leaves and
pumpkins. Sean looked sharp in blue tweed. Liz arrived in a burgundy 1934
Cadillac. The actual car from Downton Abbey, Buffy whispered, and stepped out to
the sound of Jimmy Cliff singing Many Rivers to Cross. She wore white and glossy
green wellies. The ceremony was short but lovely. Champagne popped, Sinatra
sang, guests gathered around the fire for speeches and toasted marshmallows. A
glass was raised to Sean's late father Rob. The dead remembered and named,
brought a little closer to the warmth. Afterwards we all walked back down the
hill, a line of suits and dresses passing along an avenue of graves, till death
do us part never felt so real. As guests gathered by the steps of the chapel to
smoke and chat and sip beer, Liz and her mother and uncle stopped at the white
archway of the Garden of Rest. Her grandmother had died before Liz was born and
her ashes scattered there. It was a quiet, still moment. A final ritual. Friends
and family formed two lines, an honour guard, and Sean and Liz ran between them
in a shower of rose petals. Confetti in a graveyard. If one were looking for a
symbol to sum up how these great gardens of death can also be places of life,
just follow the drift of those petals. Andy Clarke was reading A Tomb with a
View. The book was abridged by Anna Magnusson and the producer was Ailey
Macready. And since Peter Ross's book was published, the guru of the graveyard
Howard Otting has died. His ashes are scattered in Ireland's Vale. The shipping
forecast follows in a moment. And now on BBC Radio 4, the shipping forecast
issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency on
0015 on Saturday the 4th of March. There are warnings of gales in North Atzira,
South Atzira, Fisher and German Byte. The general synopsis at 1800. New high
expected rock all, 1032 by 1800 tomorrow. The area forecasts for the next 24
hours. Viking, North Atzira, South Atzira, East 40s. Northerly or northwesterly,
5 to 7, occasionally gale 8 until later in the Atziras, snow showers, moderate
or good, occasionally very poor. West 40s, northerly or northwesterly, 4 to 6,
showers good. Cromartie, 4th, north or northwest, 3 or 4, occasionally 5 at
first, becoming variable 2 to 4 later, showers good. Tyne, Dogger, north or
northwest, 3 to 5, occasionally 6 in Dogger, showers good. Fisher, northerly or
northwesterly, 6 to gale 8, occasionally severe gale 9 at first in East, showers
becoming wintry, good, occasionally poor. German Byte, northwesterly, 5 to 7,
occasionally 4 at first in the South, occasionally gale 8 for a time in North,
showers becoming wintry later, good, occasionally poor later. Humber, Thames,
north or northwest, 4 or 5, showers good. Dover, White, Portland, Plymouth,
northerly or northeasterly, veering easterly later in South Plymouth, 3 to 5,
showers good. Biscay, east or northeast, 2 to 4, occasionally 5 at first,
showers good. Trafalgar, variable 2 to 4, becoming southerly or southeasterly, 4
to 6 in West and easterly, 4 to 6 in far southeast, showers, rain later in West,
good, occasionally poor later in West. South Fitzroy, easterly or northeasterly,
veering easterly or southeasterly, 4 to 6, showers good. North Fitzroy, Sol,
easterly or northeasterly, 3 to 5, showers good. Lundy, Fastnet, Irish Sea,
variable mainly northeast, 2 to 4, showers good. Shannon, southeasterly at first
in West, otherwise easterly or northeasterly, 2 to 4, showers good. Rockall,
Mallon, Hebrides, Bailey, variable 2 to 4, becoming westerly or northwesterly, 3
to 5 later, except in South Rockall and South Mallon, showers, good,
occasionally poor later. Fair Isle, northerly or northwesterly, 4 to 6, becoming
variable 2 to 4 in West and later elsewhere, showers, wintry in East, good,
occasionally poor. Faroes, variable 2 to 4, becoming cyclonic, 3 to 5, showers,
becoming wintry, good, occasionally poor. And South East Iceland, cyclonic, 3 to
5, becoming variable 2 to 4 later, showers, wintry in North, good, occasionally
poor in North. And now the weather reports from coastal stations for 2300. Tyree
Automatic, North 2, 22 miles, 1035, rising slowly. Stornoway, North West by
West, 2, slight rain, 9 miles, 1034, rising slowly. Lerwick, North by West, 3,
16 miles, 1030, rising slowly. Wick Automatic, North West, 3, drizzle, 1 1⁄2
miles, 1031, steady. Aberdeen, West North West, 3, 19 miles, 1032, steady.
Lukers, West by North, 2, 16 miles, 1033, rising slowly. Boomer, West by North,
3, 1032, steady. Bridlington, North by West, 3, 1031, rising slowly. Sandedy
Light Vessel Automatic, North North East, 4, 11 miles, 1028. St Catharines Point
Automatic, North East by North, 1, 1030, rising slowly. Jersey, North East by
East, 2, 16 miles, 1028, now falling. Channel Light Vessel Automatic, North East
by East, 4, 1029. Scilly Automatic, North East by East, 3, 19 miles, 1030,
rising more slowly. Milford Haven, East, 2, 11 miles, 1032, rising slowly.
Aberporth, South East by East, 1, 16 miles, 1033, now falling. Valley, North, 1,
14 miles, 1033, rising slowly. Liverpool-Crosby, North East, 2, 6 miles, 1032,
now falling. Valencia, East South East, 1, 27 miles, 1033, rising slowly.
Ronald's Way, North North West, 1, 1033, rising slowly. Mallinhead, South by
West, 1, 22 miles, 1034, now falling. And Macrohanish Automatic, North West by
North, 3, 30 miles, 1033, rising slowly. And here's the weather forecast for the
inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern Ireland valid for the following 24
hours, issued by the Met Office at 2300 on Friday the 3rd of March. The general
situation. High pressure currently centred to the north-west of Scotland will
edge slowly southwards during the next 24 hours. This will bring mainly settled
weather conditions, although there will be one or two showers around. Cape Wrath
to Rattray Head, including Orkney. North or North West, 3 to 5, becoming
variable 3 or less, then West 3 to 5 later. Showers good. Rattray Head to
Berwick-upon-Tweed. West or North West, 4 or 5, veering North or North West, 2
to 4, backing South West 3 or 4 later. Showers good. Berwick-upon-Tweed to
Whitby. North or North West, 3 to 5, backing West 2 to 4 later. Showers good.
Whitby to Gibraltar Point. North or North West, 3 or 4, occasionally 5 at first.
Showers good. Gibraltar Point to North Foreland. Northerly, 2 to 4, occasionally
5 at first. Showers good. North Foreland to Celsei Bill. Northerly or North-
Easterly, 3 or 4, occasionally 5 at first. Showers good. Celsei Bill to Lyme
Regis. North-East, 3 or 4, occasionally 5 at first, becoming variable 3 or less
for a time later. Mainly fair. Good. Lyme Regis to Land's End, including the
Isles of Scilly. East or North-East, 2 to 4, mainly fair. Good. Land's End to St
David's Head, including the Bristol Channel. Easterly or North-Easterly,
becoming variable later, 2 to 4, fair. Good. St David's Head to Great Ormhead,
including St George's Channel. East, backing North or North-East, then variable
later, 3 or less. Showers later. Good. Great Ormhead to the Mull of Galloway.
Variable 3 or less, becoming West, 2 or 3 later. Showers later. Good. Isle of
Man. North or North-East, becoming variable, then West or North-West later, 3 or
less. Showers later. Good. Loch Foyle to Carlingford Loch. North or North-West,
2 or 3, backing West or North-West, 2 to 4 later. Showers later. Good. Mull of
Galloway to Mull of Kintyre, including the Firth of Clyde and North Channel.
Variable, mainly Northerly or North-Westerly in North Channel, 3 or less,
becoming Westerly, 2 to 4 later. Showers later. Good. Mull of Kintyre to
Ardenhamirchen Point. North or North-West, 2 or 3, becoming variable, 3 or less,
then West or North-West, 2 to 4 later. Showers later. Good. Ardenhamirchen Point
to Cape Wrath. Variable, becoming mainly North-West for a time, 2 to 4, backing
West to 5 later. Showers. Good. And Shetland Isles. Northerly, backing North-
Westerly, 4 or 5, occasionally 6 and East, becoming variable, mainly North-East,
2 to 4 later. Wintry showers in East, then later elsewhere. Good. Occasionally
poor. And that completes the Shipping Bulletin. Well, looking ahead to next week
here on Radio 4, it's been 20 years since America and Britain went to war in
Iraq. In a new series, Gordon Carrera examines the decision to go to war,
hearing from insiders, some who haven't spoken until now. And he looks at the
war's legacy on trust, politics and Iraq today. Shock and War, Iraq 20 years on,
on Radio 4 and on BBC Sounds, next Monday to Friday afternoon at 1.45. Well,
that's it for another day here on BBC Radio 4. On behalf of my colleague Charles
Carroll in the newsroom, and myself, Al Ryan, here in Broadcasting House, if you
have been, thanks for listening. Have a safe, quiet and peaceful night. Good
night. Eoha. BREAK BREAK