TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. BBC News
at seven o'clock. In the past few minutes, police in East Sussex, who've been
searching for a missing baby, have said they've found the body of a newborn.
Officers have been searching for the child since its parents, Constance Martin
and Mark Gordon, were arrested in Brighton on Monday, accused of gross
negligence manslaughter. They had disappeared with the newborn in early January,
sparking a police manhunt. The government has said it needed to take tough
decisions on prioritising Covid tests at the start of the pandemic, after the
Daily Telegraph accused the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock of ignoring
advice from senior medical officers. The paper, which has obtained thousands of
Mr Hancock's WhatsApp messages, says they suggest he rejected guidance to test
everyone entering care homes in England. Our political correspondent David
Wallace-Lockhart says Mr Hancock has strenuously denied the claims. What Mr
Hancock's team are stressing is that there was an operational meeting that took
place between those messages, where he was told there simply was not the testing
capacity for everyone going into a care home to get a test. And a spokesperson
has said that these are stolen messages in their words that have been doctored
to create a false story that Matt rejected clinical advice. China has criticised
the FBI for saying a laboratory leak in Wuhan was the most likely source of the
Covid-19 virus. Other US intelligence agencies remain undecided about the cause.
A Chinese foreign ministry official said the US intelligence community had a
history of misdeeds, fraud and deception. The parents of a disabled girl who
died after becoming morbidly obese have been jailed for gross negligence
manslaughter. Kayleigh Titford, from Newtown in mid-Wales, was left immobile in
bed for more than six months in 2020. Alan Titford was sentenced to seven and a
half years in prison, while Sarah Lloyd-Jones was jailed for six years. Greece's
transport minister has resigned after one of the country's worst ever rail
disasters. Costas Karamanlis had earlier visited the site of the head-on
collision between a passenger service and a freight train which left at least 38
people dead. BBC News. Radio 4's Lent Talks for 2023. Six reflective moments
taking inspiration from the Lord's Prayer, with meditations on forgiveness,
fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. A collection of personal stories, from
the man who forgave his brother's killers, to the writer escaping a war zone, to
facing despair but finding hope. Sharing experiences on faith, humanity and how
the words of the Lord's Prayer have impacted people's lives. Lent Talks. Begins
this evening at 8.45 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. And coming up in 15 minutes
tonight on St David's Day, Front Row is coming from Cardiff, bringing you the
latest arts and culture stories of Wales. Welsh National Opera's latest
production is Blaze of Glory. Set in a Welsh Valleys village in the 1950s, it
follows a group of minors who raise spirits following a pit disaster by
reforming their male voice choir. And the Barry male voice choir also performs
live in the studio at 7.15. But first on Radio 4, the Archers and a happy St
David's Day in Ambridge. Pat was saying it's been a very different St David's
Day this year. Is it St David's Day? 1st March. It completely passed me by.
That's understandable Tony. Pat usually makes a big thing of it doesn't she?
Particularly since Natasha came on the scene. Yeah, her shop's looking quite
bare. I mean compared to previous years. No decorations, no special offers. Pat
often cooks as a traditional cowl too. She said she's been putting her energy
into making things for the family. She said she's been putting her energy into
making things for the funeral buffet and stuff. Yes, yes. I'm doing the same.
That's good of you Susan. It's the least I can do. We all want the day to go as
well as possible. Thank you. Oh, it's a terrible time for everyone. But it's
nice to have something to focus on. Neil's applied to become a volunteer guide
at Lower Loxley. Oh yes. I'll tell you what's a godsend for me. Having
livestock. The cattle always need looking after no matter what else is
happening. That's true. When John died, they pretty much saved my sanity. Sorry
to bother you Tony. Have you got a minute? Afternoon Susan. Hello. Course,
what's up? I need to talk to you about the funeral. You'd better get back to the
dairy hadn't you Susan? Well actually, Pat asked me to pop into the house first.
Okay. She's trying to sort out a problem with the till. Oh, it's not the printer
again is it? I think so. Anyway, I said I'd check on Jack and Henry for her. Oh,
thanks. Bye Lillian. I'll see you Friday. Yes, yes. Bye Susan. What can I do for
you then? It's this tribute to Jenny. Now that Kate's decided it'll be too much
for her, the whole family's in a bit of turmoil about it. I hope people aren't
being hard on Kate. Oh no, no, no. Not at all. Everyone knows it's a big ask. It
was actually quite brave of her to admit she was having problems with it. Yes.
But no one else has put themselves forward to take it over. Well, I think the
answer's obvious. Is it? You should do it. Me? You'd be ideal. You've got the
warmth, the wit, the personal touch. You're not trying to soft-soap me, are you
Tony? Not at all. I can't think of anyone more qualified. Do you really think
that? Honestly. I just know you'd do her justice. Well, if the others are okay
with it... I'm sure they will be. In that case, how can I say no? Susan! Oh,
hello Lee. I've just been checking on your boys. Have you? Pat asked me to. She
was tied up in the shop. Oh, thanks. They're doing fine. Oh, brilliant. Jack!
Henry! It's time to go home! Helen's away at a meeting with a potential
customer. Oh yes, I know. Oh, of course she would. In Ludlow. So, I'm cooking
tea tonight. Lee, while I've got you... Yeah? Have you heard about this electric
charging station? Of course. It's a pretty hot topic around here. Isn't it a
terrible idea? I'm not sure I'd go that far. Surely you're not in favour?
Climate change is a massive problem. But nobody round here has an electric car.
They do. Who? Ardill. Ardill? Grey Gables. No real villagers, I mean. I'd like
to go electric as soon as I can afford it. But you'll just charge that at home,
won't you? Not everyone can do that. I still don't see why they have to have
this thing slap in the middle of Umbridge. Have you seen the leaflet the gym's
done? Er... Oh, it's cold out there. Hey, Tony. Were you at the Laurels today,
Lee? Nope, hospital today. I was wondering how Ben's getting on. He had a fairly
tough start. Yeah, I know Ruth and David are worried about him. Oh, I'm sure
they are. Can't be long now until your girls leave for America, Lee. Yeah, three
weeks. I'm dreading it. Oh, I bet you are. But, anyway... Anyway, thanks for
looking in on the boys, Susan. Mustn't keep you from the dairy any longer. Oh!
Clary must be missing you, especially with Helen away for the afternoon. Oh,
yes, I suppose I'd better get back. Thanks again for looking in on them, Susan.
No problem, any time. Bye. It's going to be a real wrench, I know. It is, but I
really don't want to burden you with it, Tony. Oh, my loss doesn't make your
pain any the less. It's just so far away. If they were ill or hurt, it would
take me so long to get to California. Lee, I know how you're feeling. I remember
when Helen was on remand. Not being able to be there when she needed us. That
must have been awful. It was. Unbearable. But, I'm pretty sure they're going to
be happy in their new home. It'll still be hard for you, but... But wherever
they are, they'll always be your daughters. No one can take that away from you.
Thank you, Tony. Hi! Oh, hello! Surprise! You're early. I thought you said you'd
be back after six. Well, the meeting was much quicker than I thought. Weren't
they interested? No, they were completely on board. Oh, great! I was going to do
the rounds of the other food shops, but I really wanted to get back to give you
some support, Dad. Oh, that's nice. It is, but actually, your Dad's been
supporting me. Come in. Tony, it's me again. I hope I'm not disturbing. Pat said
you were going through some old photos. No, no, that's fine. Sit yourself down.
I, er... I wondered if she meant the slides that we were looking at last week.
Oh, no, this is a different lot. I found an old packet of prints at the back of
a drawer. Anything the matter? It's this... It's this blessed tribute. I've been
trying to make a start on it for hours, but I'm completely stuck. You mean
you've got, erm... What do they call it? A writer's block? No, not exactly. It's
not that I can't think of things I'd like to say. It's actually quite the
opposite. It's... It's more that there's so much to say. Yes. Jenny was such a
character. How do you condense 70-odd years into a few minutes? Hmm. Could you
not pick one or two elements and concentrate on those? Yeah, well, I'll probably
have to, but this is the point. Which ones? I mean, one of the things that made
her who she was is how strongly she reacted to really serious life events. Like
Brian's run-in with Joe Grundy's BSE cow. She basically ran the farm for months,
didn't she? But it goes back much further than that. Remember when she fell
pregnant with Adam? And refused point-blank to say who the father was? Yeah, in
the face of enormous pressure, determined to bring him up alone. Yeah. And of
course... Hmm. Oh, yeah. That's the biggest thing of all. Taking on Rory after
Siobhan died. I mean, that's monumental, but can I touch on it? And if so, how?
When Brian and Rory will be sitting there in the front row. Oh, I can see your
problem. I'm just completely stuck, I'm afraid. Hmm. Would a gin and tonic help?
Well, I've never known a time when a gin and tonic didn't help. Oddly enough, I
feel the same about a pint. I'll sort us out some drinks, shall I? You are an
angel. Oh, while I'm doing that, why don't you take a look at those photos? I
don't think people have any conception of how big this thing is going to be.
It's a two-acre site, and they're planning 30 charging points. Are you sure you
don't want a hand with that? Plus other parking. No, no, you cooked. That's
another 20-odd spaces, Lee. That might be what the company's putting in the
planning application. It doesn't mean it'll be accepted. These things are often
toned down, aren't they? It's still going to be a terrible eyesore. They'll
probably do a lot of landscaping to soften it. But what about the lights?
Blaring out all day and night. Not all day, surely. That wouldn't be very green.
It's no laughing matter, Helen. No, sorry. I haven't seen people this upset
since the Route B fiasco. Don't remind me. Anyway, look, there's Jim's leaflet.
It tells you all the facts, including the things the company doesn't want you to
know. I promise you I will read it thoroughly. There's lots more on the Facebook
group, including details of the meeting at the board. I'm sure there is. OK,
then, I'll leave you to your reading. Oh, let me see you out. No, no, it's fine.
I know the way. I'll see you tomorrow, Helen. Yeah, bye. You did a good job of
staying out of that. I've heard it all before. That's why, if it's not that,
it's her summer house. I didn't know she had a summer house. Give it time. I
mean, I can see both sides. I'm just finding it hard to get involved at the
moment. You're thinking about the girls, aren't you? Yeah. You've been very
quiet. It's just like it's on my shoulders, dragging me down all the time. Look,
I was going to wait a while before saying this, because I need to do some more
research, but I've been looking at flights to San Francisco. What? I think we
should book some time to go over there later in the year. No, Helen. It would
mean you've got something to look forward to. Help soften the blow a bit? Well,
yes. I mean, that would be lovely. And when I say we, I mean all four of us.
Jack and Henry, too. Why not? Because that would cost even more. We can't afford
it. I know it would be expensive, but, Lee, you've made some huge sacrifices.
Agreeing to the girls going, deciding not to move there yourself. Don't you
think you deserve this? That's a very kind way to put it, but it would be a huge
amount of money. Well, I'm sure we can save up over the next few months,
especially if we can promise the boys a special holiday. For a trip like that,
we're talking, well, probably more than my car cost. I don't care. Would you
like to go and see Mabel and Evie in America? Of course, but... So it's going to
happen. Even if I have to cash in an ISA or something. What? You are amazing. I
just want you to be happy. I love you so much. We look so sweet and innocent.
Butter wouldn't melt. Where do you think that is? I'm pretty sure it's Cornwall.
There's one in there of me eating an enormous pasty. Oh, was that Paul Perrault
then? It must have been. Well, we scared the life out of poor Jenny. When I
pretended to fall off the cliff. Poor girl. What a cruel thing to do to her. It
was your idea. Well, only because there was a soft ledge to land on. Stay on my
knee. And her face when you popped your head apart. I think I left a folder in
here when we collected the boys. Oh, yeah, there it is. What's that then? Just
something I'm thinking about for the dairy and cheese room. So, what were you
laughing about? Oh, just a wicked trick we played on your auntie Jennifer. In
our defense, we were quite little. We've been looking at old holiday photos. And
it's really helped us with this tribute. We've decided it should focus on
Jennifer as our sister. That's our unique perspective after all. That's lovely.
I feel much happier now I've got a theme to work around. I'm so pleased. And not
only that, but I've just had an idea for a tweak to the proceedings. Have you?
And I think Jenny would wholeheartedly approve. Brian may have a solution when
we return to the archers tomorrow night at the same time. As sea levels rise,
tough decisions are going to have to be taken about the flood defences of
coastal Britain. How realistic will it be to continue to maintain them in the
future? Costing the Earth asks whether we're facing up to this yet and visits
two places where the effects are already being felt. That's at nine o'clock. But
first, we join Michael Burke with news of tonight's Moral Maze. God seems to
have more than a walk-on part in the race to be Scotland's new leader. The first
hustings will be held tonight in a contest that's been dominated by faith rather
than politics. A former frontrunner, Kate Forbes, looks now to be the back
marker. Having acknowledged her membership of the Evangelical Free Church of
Scotland means she's opposed to gay marriage and having children out of wedlock.
The old beliefs have collided with the new religion, as some see it, of human
rights. Time was a successful politician had to at least pretend to be
religious. What's changed and is it for the better? The Moral Maze in three
quarters of an hour. But now on Radio 4, it's time for Front Row with Huw
Stevens. Hello and happy St David's Day. Dydd go i'l dewy hapus. Croeso i front
row o'r gairdydd. Welcome to Front Row from Cardiff. We've a busy studio this
evening. I'll be talking about a new play set in Cardiff, Romeo and Julie. We'll
be looking at the latest production from Welsh national opera, Blaze of Glory.
We'll be hearing from the Deputy Minister for the Arts in the Welsh Government,
Dawn Bowden, about cultural policy in this country. And Blaze of Glory is a
story about a male voice choir. And don't you worry, we have singers here as
well to mark St David's Day. Eight members of the mighty Barry Male Voice Choir,
established 1902, although not the original members, clearly. We are thrilled
that they're here. And Steve Bowen is marshalling their forces. How are you,
Steve? Very well, thanks. What will you sing for us first? We'll be singing
Reitchie. Tell me about Reitchie. It's a hymn that came out at the beginning of
last century. It's pretty much a temperance hymn, really, against the old drink.
But I mean, it's a song that I remember singing, you know, when we were in
school in assembly. So it's very much a well-known hymn. We look forward to
hearing it. Here they are, starting us off on front row. Barry Male Voice Choir.
Barry Male Voice Choir. Barry Male Voice Choir. Barry Male Voice Choir. Barry
Male Voice Choir. Barry Male Voice Choir. Barry Male Voice Choir. Barry Male
Voice Choir. Barry Male Voice Choir. Praise the Lord, we are a musical nation,
as the Reverend Eli Jenkins remarks in Under Milk Wood. Thank you more from Cwrm
Ebion a Barry. Barry Male Voice Choir later. And we'll hear about their
contribution to Blaze of Glory. Welsh National Opera's new production is, I
suggest, a Welsh National Opera, in that it tells a Welsh story about Welsh
people, their industry and culture. And it's sung in both Welsh and English.
Emma Jenkins wrote those words and David Hackbridge-Johnson, the music. Welcome.
David, tell us how Blaze of Glory began. Well, I came quite late to the project.
And of course, I knew nothing about it until I was invited to take part. I was
actually down in a little school in the hinterlands of Surrey and doing a
workshop with the students there, which involved some jazz and some classical
pieces that I'd written. And there was a young lad who was part of this weekend.
And I didn't know who he was, but he was very much involved in what was going
on. And he went back home afterwards and said to his mum, I think I found the
composer for your next opera. And his mum was Emma Jenkins. And did you believe
him, Emma? I didn't at first, no. And then he played me some clips of David's
music. And the thing about Blaze of Glory, obviously it is a piece about male
voice choirs, but because it's set in the 50s, it required a very, very special
kind of composer who was able to blend that music from the 50s, big band, jive,
Lindy Hop, acapella, and combine all of that. And David was our man. And it's
set in a Welsh mining community in the 50s. There's an accident in the pit, as
happened regularly then. And a lot of this is based on true events, Emma. I
would say every single thing that happens is based on, to some degree, on truth.
Certainly I have elaborated some stories, and I've woven some things of my own
in. But everything that happens, even the most extraordinary things, are based
on truth, yes. Like what? Can you summarise Blaze of Glory for us? Yes, without
giving away too many spoilers, it is a feel-good opera that is set in the 50s,
and it follows the fortunes of a group of miners who are still reeling from a
pit tragedy in which many lives have been lost. And they decide, and the whole
community decides, that the way through this is to join together in song.
There's not that many of them left, so there's only enough to form a small glee.
But it follows their escapades, their triumphs, their disasters, through to the
end. And actually, in the end, it is a woman that leads them to glory at the
Mass Voices at the Royal Albert Hall. It's thoroughly enjoyable. You didn't even
mention the yodelling, but there is a yodeller in this production. Yes, there is
a bit of a wild card there. We have a yodeller, and again, this is based on a
true story. In my research, I discovered that one of the test pieces that they
had to do, this is going back a while now, in the early 20th century, one of the
test pieces was Thomas's Le Tyrol, for which yodelling is required. And
Triorchi, who at that time were the ones to beat, happened to have access to a
chap, a brewer, who had been to Austria and had learned the art of yodelling.
And so another choir kidnapped him, perhaps kidnapped is too strong a word, but
they managed to get his expertise to help them get the edge. And I thought that
was just such a cracking story, I wanted to include it. And let's hear some of
that in action now, Le Tyrol. Magician David, did you enjoy working with the
yodeler? Very much so. We had a marvellous yodeler called Fergal, who looks the
part. He looks quite Austrian, actually, doesn't he? He does. I mean, Fergal is
an amazing countertenor who I'd worked with before, and I'd always wanted him to
be in this. And he actually went away and learnt yodelling in order to perfect
the art. And the dance moves that go with it. Right, yeah. Kicking your heels up
and all this kind of stuff. Yeah, it's very impressive. And David, you've
composed operas before, but also 15 symphonies. And as you mentioned, a lot of
different kinds of music here. There's popular music, some lovely Andrew
Sisters-esque doo-wop. Why is that so important for Blaze of Glory? In a way,
like my previous opera, Madelaine, it's a period piece. It can only really
happen in the time it happens. And it references all sorts of music that you
might have heard in the 50s. So the Andrew Sisters, close harmony, that was the
popular music of its day, and it's quite jazzy. So being a jazz musician by
profession for many, many decades, I thought, well, this is right up my street.
So I could use big band voicings, all that close harmony stuff, and bring that
in. Because the libretto actually demands it. It's not something I could escape.
Because if you've suddenly got a piece of text that is going in verses and
choruses and has a particularly snappy rhythm to it, that's my job half done. I
think, yeah, I can find some really good rhythmic tunes for this. How did the
opera singers then react to singing doo-wop and, indeed, male voice choirs?
Well, I think the male voice choir tradition is embedded in Welsh national opera
itself. And I think, Emma, you know more about this than me. And the jazz
element and the doo-wop element and the scat singing that they have to do, I
mean, I think this choir actually can do anything. Anything you ask them, they
can do. When I first heard them sing, I was almost, my back was against the
wall. Not just the volume, just the quality, the beauty of the sound. I thought,
oh, there must be about 100 of them. No, there isn't 100 of them. It's not a
massive choir, but they've got this gorgeous full tone. And they can adapt that
tone to any type of music. It was just a joy to write for them. And Emma, the
production is about a male voice choir. The choirs themselves were part of
forming WNO in 1946. So is their involvement in this production a nod to that
era and their involvement? Yeah, very much so. So obviously, the opera is set
just post-World War II, but that's exactly when WNO was formed and at a time
when, if anything, they were asking themselves, is this the moment to form an
opera company? And actually, it's exactly the moment to form an opera company.
In the aftermath of the war, this is exactly what we should do. And many of the
men who joined the Welsh National Opera Chorus at that time were miners or steel
workers, just ordinary men, men and women who came and joined. There's a link up
across the Atlantic as well with the great American bass baritone, Paul Robeson.
And Robeson was a big supporter of the Welsh miners, wasn't he? What did he see
in their struggles? Well, he saw them as kindred spirits, actually. In his own
words, he said that he saw their struggle as being likened to his ancestors'
struggle with slavery. And he says that their struggle is slavery in all but
name. And there was a tremendous link between them, a love between Robeson and
the miners. He marched with the miners during the Depression. And he wanted to
come and visit them at the miners' Stedford in Porthcawl, but was unable to
because the American government revoked his passport. And so at his own expense,
set up a transatlantic, the famous transatlantic link in which he addressed the
miners. They sang to each other. It was a wonderful cultural exchange. And we
hear his voice in the opera, don't we? We absolutely do. There's also Anthony,
an African-American GI who has stayed in Wales after the war. So there's a
political connection here between the US and Wales. There is a political
connection. So it was indeed a true thing that after the Second World War, there
were many African-American GIs who decided to settle here. And one of my
inspirations for that was the work of Ralph Ellison, the African-American writer
who wrote In a Strange Land, which is semi-autobiographical. It's about a young
man who feels dispossessed by America and rejected by the land of his birth, as
it were. And he walks into a chapel or hall and there are some men singing male
voice choir songs. And he sees tremendous link between that and, of course, the
gospel songs that were part of his heritage. There's also a lot of humour in
Blaze of Glory. The Times said it's an opera that's laugh out loud, funny after
your opening night. We don't usually go to the opera for a laugh, David, but we
should this time. I think we should. If you look at the history of opera, I
mean, I've never been able to keep a straight face through The Marriage of
Figaro or a number of Donizetti comedy operas if they're done well. And of
course, that's down to the production. We've been so lucky. We've had a
wonderful director, Caroline Clegg, who's brought all of that inherent humour
that's in the text. She's brought it out. And there's also a lot of dancing. If
you think opera singers can't dance, come and see. There's also, of course, a
stunning love story throughout, Emma. It's Miss Price and Mr. Pew. What's going
on there? An unlikely love affair, perhaps. Miss Price, a very straight-laced
accompanist who starts the piece as somebody who is just simply accompanying the
men, falls in love, well, I could say seduces Mr. Pew. And it's a very beautiful
love story between two, shall we say, mature people. And it's a very sincere,
very touching story, which again has its ups and downs. I won't give away too
much there. We have a male voice choir in the studio with us tonight. Have you
enjoyed working with so many different choirs? It has been absolutely amazing.
It was baked into the writing of this opera that we would have flash mobs of
male voice choirs from everywhere we toured to and also from Cardiff, obviously,
where we opened. That was essential to it. And it's something that we wanted to
carry on from Ronda Rips It Up, which was the piece I'd written for WNO before,
which Caroline Clegg also directed. That community aspect is integral to the
whole thing. And Steve, from Barry Male Voice Choir, did you ever think you'd,
well, one, be in an opera and two, be part of a flash mob? No. I have to say
it's a bit of a surprise, but we were delighted when we were invited last summer
to take part. Have you been rehearsing since then? Yes. We've been rehearsing
pretty full on. Somebody from the WNO has been coming to our rehearsals as well
to help us through the music and get the tonality right, etc. So that's been
great. Great. We'll hear you singing again before the end of the programme.
Thank you, Steve. And to Emma Jenkins and David Hackbridge-Johnson, Blaze of
Glory is at the Wales Millennium Centre on the 10th, 14th and 18th of March.
Venu Cymru in Llandudno on April 1st. And then tours to Bristol, Liverpool,
Southampton and Milton Keynes. Don't miss it. Someone who hasn't is the Deputy
Minister for Arts and Sport, as well as Chief Whip in the Welsh Government.
Since being appointed in May 2021, she's announced £22 million of additional
funding for the Theatre Clwyd redevelopment, a £1.5 million Creative Skills
Fund, £5.45 million for the new Football Museum for Wales in Wrexham and
£750,000 to refurbish local libraries and museums. And the list goes on. So when
I spoke to Dawn Bowden earlier today on a rather creaky line, I began by asking
her if this is a particularly good time to be leading on culture for the Welsh
Government. I think absolutely, Hugh. And before I start, can I say, Danny
Hubbis, of course. Yes, happy St David's Day to you too. Indeed. Yeah, yeah,
absolutely. I think that kind of feeds into the theme because our culture is so
important. People have asked about, there are lots of things that need money,
don't they? The health service needs money. Everything needs money. But our
cultural sector is so important to the health and wellbeing of a nation. And
that's why we made it a programme for government commitment. You're the Deputy
Minister for Arts and Sports and you're leading the development of a new
cultural strategy for Wales currently with your written statement on the subject
last November, including this quote, my focus is on ensuring that the new
strategy is innovative, ambitious and fit for purpose. Now, I should declare at
this point, I'm co-founder of the Welsh Music Prize, the yearly annual prize for
an album from Wales, which the Welsh Government now support financially. But is
it possible, Dawn, for the strategy to be any of those things when the culture,
communication, Welsh language, sports and international relations committee in
the same month issued a report saying that the culture and sports sectors need
additional help to cope with the cost of living crisis and that the crisis now
facing the sector is as great as at any time over the last two years? I mean,
should it be blue sky thinking when people really need help paying the bills to
keep their spaces and organisations running? Yeah, we're trying to do both. And
I'm not saying that doesn't come without challenge. We've seen obviously we saw
the pandemic and the impact that that had on every sector, not just the cultural
and sports sectors. But if I concentrate on the areas that I'm responsible for,
you know, what we saw through the pandemic is that government had to support the
sector with millions of pounds through the cultural recovery fund. We came out
of the pandemic and then face the cost of living crisis and everything that's
gone with that, including massive increases in energy bills, which has hit all
of these organisations to such an extent. And some of that we are able to help
with, some of it we can't because it's not within our competence and our power
to do so. The energy costs, for instance, it's entirely a matter for the UK
government to resolve. But what we have tried to do is to support all the
sectors as much as we can. We've given our arm's length bodies, our sponsor
bodies, the National Museum, the libraries and so on, additional funding to help
with things like on energy costs and the cost of living crisis. We've tried to
put additional money in to support staff salaries during this period as well. Is
the plan still to make the new culture strategy available this year then? Yes,
we are very much hoping that we will have a report on the cultural strategy by
the summer, an initial report in the summer. My ambition is to ensure that we
have that strategy in place by the end of this year and we can start to develop
the work around the priorities that are identified in that strategy. And the
strategy isn't just about supporting the organisations, it's about how do we
bring people in and make everybody part of the, you know, enjoy and be part of
the culture and sport in the country. It is almost a tale of two halves, isn't
it? Because if you walk the streets of Cardiff, chances are, you know, if you
walk long enough, you'll see a TV crew. And the city's attracted £50 million to
develop a world-leading hub for TV, film and the wider media industry in Wales,
which is all very exciting. But up until this week, there were fears that the
Museum of Cardiff, which you've described as one of Wales's key local museums
with an excellent reputation for telling the diverse stories of the people of
our capital city, it was in danger of closing due to Cardiff Council's budget
shortfall. And then there's the ongoing saga of St David's Hall being sold or
leased to a commercial operator. So what I'm thinking is, despite all the new
media investment, is there a danger that Cardiff and Wales is losing its kind of
grassroots cultural treasures, which have been part of Welsh life for many
decades? And will continue to be so for many decades to come, if I have anything
to do with it, because it is so, so important. But you know, we can't escape the
fact that we are on the back of 12 years of austerity. And you can't expect that
kind of reduction in your finances to have no impact at all. No, understood. But
this is a local issue in a way. St David's Hall in Cardiff is a local issue. And
yesterday, Cardiff Civic Society tweeted their concerns for St David's Hall
future and that the proposed sums that have led the council to its current
position might not add up. And they're not the only organisation or groups or
people who feel this way. There is a fear, I think Dawn, that Cardiff will lose
far more than it will gain in the potential deal. I hope not. I mean, if we just
deal with Cardiff, Cardiff is only one city in Wales. I mean, I know it's the
capital city, but you know, I've got a responsibility for looking at things
right the way across Wales. And we're trying to invest equitably across the
whole of Wales. But we can only do what we can do with the money that we have.
And what we have done this year and in this budget, and local authorities will
acknowledge this, is we have been able to make awards to local authorities
significantly higher than we have in previous years. No authority in Wales is
receiving a budget uplift of less than 7% this year. But ultimately, what
Cardiff Council does with its budget is a matter for Cardiff Council and they
will determine their own priorities. We set out very clearly what we expect to
happen, what we want to see happen. And that's what our government strategies
are all about. But within local authority spending, we can't tell Cardiff
Council what to do with their money. They have their own democratic mandate and
they have to spend their money as they see fit. Let's turn to television and
Welsh language drama has been doing very well with the success of Y Golai, The
Light, Netflix buying the rights to broadcast the crime thriller Dal y Mell, a'n
i'n bore merched, or Keeping Faith, to give it its English language title. But
given that, according to the 2021 census, approximately 18% of the population in
Wales speak Welsh, some might be surprised that it's so high, some might be
surprised that it's so low. But how do you respond to criticism that too much
money is being spent on Welsh language productions? Well, I don't accept that
criticism. We spend what we feel we need to spend to develop the language. We're
going back to what we're talking about in terms of our cultural strategy. But
language is very much part of that. You know, I'm a Welsh learner myself. And I
think I'm part of the Cymraeg 2050 cohort, if you like, that will hopefully be,
you know, that we will be developing the language as we go along. And I think we
need to be very clear about what Cymraeg 2050 is all about. It's about
normalising the Welsh language, it's about normalising the use of Welsh, that we
see it, that we hear it, and that we use whatever we can and whatever Welsh that
we have. So if it's that, is that a political move then? I mean, is investing in
TV and film productions, which are bilingual, I mean, is it a direct political
thing rather than a cultural entertainment kind of investing in jobs? Or is it
all tied together? It's all tied together and the cultural strategy is all tied
together. It's about our economy. It's about our culture. It's about the
language. It's about everything. Now, in December, you announced grant awards of
£4.5 million over the next three years to support the delivery of the culture,
heritage and sport goals and actions in the government's anti-racist Wales
action plan. You didn't give a reason for why you felt it was so important to
make such funding available now. But I wonder, is it linked to the fallout from
the Yellowface controversy, which engulfed the Music Theatre Wales production,
the Golden Dragon, and the award that was given by the Wales Theatre Awards a
few years ago? Also the way the former director of the National Theatre of
Wales, Cully Tiare, was treated during her time leading that organisation. Did
those things and that attention and the negative attention that attracted help
towards beginning this grant? We have long had an ambition to be an anti-racist
nation. So this isn't new for Welsh Government in terms of wanting to develop
this whole kind of anti-racist narrative and ensuring that the organisations
that we're responsible for... But the grant and the substantial £4.5 million
grant is very new, isn't it? It is, and that is part of our manifesto commitment
in 2021, and it's part of our programme for government. From my own portfolio,
then yes, absolutely. What we were doing, we were awarding money to our cultural
and sports armed land bodies to help accelerate their anti-racism work. An
example of how we look to address that, for instance, was I went to the Monlife
Heritage Centre in Abergavenny, and they're using some of this funding to
improve the interpretations of collections so that they honestly tell their
complex stories, you know, better representing their links to slavery and
colonisation and empire and respect their impact on the community of the past
and present. By doing that, we start to build a different narrative. We start
to... I mean, what they explained to me in Abergavenny, and it hadn't struck me
actually, is that when they did this training, they realised that the way that
they have their exhibitions, they had like a kitchen, an old farmhouse kitchen
reproduced there, and a table laid with tea and sugar and so on. And they
suddenly said, actually, where does tea and sugar come from? So it's on the
table, it's part of this display, it's part of this exhibition, it's part of the
story, but we don't actually say how the sugar and tea got there. Of course, the
sugar and tea got there through slavery. And so you start to tell the story of
that, and our part as a nation in that quite dark period of our history. So we
acknowledge all of that, and in acknowledging all of that, we acknowledge that
the black Asian minority and ethnic communities in this country play a huge part
in our history and our culture. Dawn Bowden. Gary Owen's two dozen or more plays
have been predominantly set in or concerned with Wales, and his latest is no
exception. Romeo and Julie sounds as if it might be a Welsh version of the
Montagues and Capulets story, but while it concerns two young lovers, their
circumstances are very different. To begin with, for Verona, reads splot. That
Cardiff district may not be the world's most romantic place, but young love does
spring up there for the two title characters, despite some inauspicious
circumstances. Romeo is the single father of a new baby who is staying with his
alcoholic mother, and Julie is under pressure from her parents to get top
A-level grades for a place at Cambridge University. And here they meet for the
first time in the cafe of a local leisure centre. So what are you studying?
Physics. Yeah, love that. Love physics. Oh yeah? Wish piece of it? You know
what? I've never done any physics, so I didn't love. I bet you haven't. What bit
are you doing? Relativistic momentum? Yeah, classic. It's funny you should say
that. That is classic. And you will never know why. You explain it to me then. I
have actually got stuff to be getting on with. Ah no, fair play. Why are you
doing that then? Relativistic momentum? Ultimately, so I can work on the theory
of everything. Oh, what now? The theory of everything. The theory of what I'm
going to have for breakfast tomorrow morning? No. Callum Scott Howells and Rosie
Sheehy as Romeo and Julie Callum, you might have seen him as his role in Colin
in It's a Sin. And Gary joins us now. Splott is the spot for you, isn't it Gary?
Well I lived there for about 10 years, so I like to have a sense that I might
know what I'm writing about, just because it's easier than making things up. So
yeah, the last few plays I've written I've set them in Splott. What
opportunities does it afford you as a playwright then? I think it's a place
that, you know, it's got a really rich history, you've got lots of families that
have lived there for years and years and generations, but lots of people move in
and then move out. So I wrote one play there called Iphigenia in Splott that was
based on a classic Greek play. And when we were putting that play on and
thinking about it, I just started to think you could rewrite any classic play
and you would find a way to express it in Splott. So I just started doing that.
You also took Chekhov's The Cherry Orchard to Pembrokeshire. Yeah. And what does
this process and this approach help you say about Wales then and the Welsh by
taking these classics in a Welsh setting? Well I think, I don't know that I'm, I
mean I probably do say things about Wales and the Welsh, but that's not why I'm
doing it. It's more that, once a play has, you know, plays are written for the
moment they're in and once that moment's passed you sort of lose a sense of what
they are and sometimes you try and have to recapture what those plays are
actually about. You need to sort of shift the kind of dressing of them. And it
seemed to me that there was a sort of resonance between the early 80s and the
kind of brash entrepreneurial energy of Margaret Thatcher's government when it
came in. And there was something quite similar to the times that Chekhov was
writing about in Russia. And I was living in Pembrokeshire in the early 80s so
that's when I sat it because I, you know, felt that I would know where those
people were and what roads they drove in and what pubs they drank in. Sure,
yeah. You've lived in several parts of Wales. You've been in Bridgend and
Aberystwyth for a while as well. Are you constantly listening to the local lingo
and listening to little intricacies in language? Definitely. I mean, you know,
it helps for a writer to just keep your ears open and your mouth shut and you
pick up stuff. Because I love the use of language in Romeo and Juliet. I love
the Cardiff, there's a lot of Cardiffisms. I love the I'll be there now in a
minute, that got a big laugh. And I think the actors enjoy playing with the
accent, don't they? They do and they've had a lot of help from Patricia, our
voice coach, who's been because I don't think any of them are originally from
Cardiff. I mean, Anita's lived here for years but, you know, Callum's from, I
think, is he from Triochi or Tonreve Isle and Rose is from Talbot. So you know,
that was a journey for them all to take that on. Yeah, and clearly it's Romeo
and Julie with obvious reference to Shakespeare. Is it difficult for you to make
it not about that story, not about the lovers court, but feuding between, you
know, and the families feuding? Well, where I started was I wanted to try and
find a version of that story of sort of an incredibly intense young love and set
it now. And of course, you could, there are plenty of contexts where you could
write about, you know, feuding gangs, but I'm probably not the person to write
those and I wouldn't know anything about them. So I was thinking, well, if you
had a kind of young love, what would be the forces that would split them up? And
I wanted it to be a sort of a more kind of positive relationship because, of
course, in Romeo and Julie, not to spoil anyone, Romeo and Juliet rather, they
both end up dead and they don't end up dead in this version. It's a slightly
more positive story. So the thing I settled on was the sort of contradiction
between ambition and sort of love of family and how those things might split the
couple up. Well, you say it's positive, but loss is a theme in this play as
well, isn't it? How does that show itself? It's, I mean, almost every kind of
progress you make in your life involves loss. And that's, you know, Romy is, you
know, he will say that his baby is the best thing that's ever happened to him.
But it also involves a kind of loss in that he can't quite be the boyfriend that
perhaps Julie needs. And Julie has wanted all her life to, you know, study
physics and unlock the secrets of the universe. But just as she's on the cusp of
doing that, she falls in love and she finds she falls in love with a single dad
and finds against her expectations that actually she's quite good at being a
kind of step mum to a baby and that that's really valuable and important as
well. And she has to make a decision whether to keep going with that or to put
it aside and carry on with her ambition. So there's a loss whatever you do.
Sure. And I found the scene where Julie, she's in tears about her educational
upbringing, how she just can't compete with her public school peers from Eton. I
found it all very emotional. Education is a big theme in this play, is it? Well,
it's a big theme in my upbringing. I think in most working class communities in
Wales, you know, parents value education and want you to get on. I mean, the
first thing the miners did was build libraries and welfare halls and that kind
of thing. And it's always been the way ahead. And certainly, you know, my
parents, my mum is very much the model for Julie's parents. And it's often a
trope in stories about these communities that success is getting away and
leaving. And I kind of wanted to look at that and look at is that the way things
should be? Should it be that you have to leave to get ahead? You know, who does
that serve? If one person who gets lucky and has the best of everything gets to
leave and have a successful life, what about everybody left behind? So yeah, I
mean, there were so many stories that are like that. And I wanted to maybe just
look at that dynamic in a different way. And there's the idea in the play as
well that you're posh if you go to a Welsh language school. I mean, that's just
a joke, isn't it? That's just, I mean, I think that's a holdover from the very
start of Welsh education when the first few, you know, your English teacher
would be whoever won the Caddad that year. And now I think it's much more, you
know, my son would certainly disagree with the thought that you are posh if you
got a Glant Harp. He would have quite a different view. The play is a co-
production between the Sherman Theatre here in Cardiff and the National Theatre.
It's on in London at the moment. It'll be here in Wales in April. That co-
production is very important to you, isn't it? Yeah, well, what was great about
that was the National took on Ithigenaia in Splart after it had its first couple
of runs in Cardiff. They at the time had a temporary venue called The Shed and
they invited us up to put it on in London. And when we first put that play on,
you know, it was on for ten days, we thought, and we thought that would be the
end of it. And getting it on at the National really helped bring it to a new
audience. And there are productions of it all over the world now. You know,
there are, you know, with the, I don't know, the Spanish equivalent of Splat in
Madrid. And so after that, the National came to us and they wanted me and Rachel
to come up with a play, but they were very clear from the start that it was our
play and it would be, you know, the story we wanted to tell, not a story that
would necessarily suit the National or be the kind of thing they would tell. So
that was really great. And you've been outspoken in the past, Gary, about your
thoughts about how does Welsh theatre flourish in the future? You've compared it
to Welsh rugby before now, which is a whole other programme. Can you briefly
tell us your thoughts on what's stopping Welsh theatre from flourishing? Well,
what I said about rugby was that our situation in theatre in Wales is it's as if
we had the Principality Stadium and it was packed dozens of times a year to see
the rugby, but we didn't have a national team, that people were packing it out
to see England and France and Ireland play, that we had an amateur sector and a
school sector that produced brilliant rugby players who go off and play for
other teams. But every time we said, shouldn't we have a Welsh team? People
said, we don't have the talent, we don't have the money. There's not the
audience for Welsh rugby. And that is our situation in Welsh theatre. If you go
to the Millennium Centre, the W&O can pack it out and it packs up very regularly
with new plays from London or from anywhere else in the UK. We never make plays
that go on in that space. And we could, of course, because we've got the talent
to do it. The new co-leader of the RSC is the ex-leader of Theatre Clwyd and
Daniel Evans. I remember talking about one man, two governors, packing out that
space. The person taking over James Corden's role on tour was Ewain Arthur. I
mean, it's literally our talent, but we don't quite have the conviction, the
nerve and the leadership from the Arts Council to make our theatres engage with
a broader audience. A lot to think about. Thank you very much, Gary Owen. Romeo
and Julie runs at the National Theatre in London until April 1st and transfers
to the Sherman Theatre in Cardiff on April 13th. That's almost it for this
evening. Do join Shahida tomorrow, who'll be talking to Edmund Duval about a new
exhibition at Kettle's Yard in Cambridge, celebrating the pottery of Lucy Rye.
And we'll be reviewing the film Close, which won the Grand Prix at Cannes, as
well as the new TV series Daisy Jones and the Six. But we can't end this St
David's Day edition of Front Row from Cardiff without something culturally
assertive from the Barry Male Voice Choir. O'Gumry, thanks to the Barry Male
Voice Choir. Diolch yn fawr to all my guests, Emma Jenkins, David Hackbridge-
Johnson, Deputy Minister of Culture Dawn Bowden, Gary Owen as well. From all of
us here on Front Row, good night. Front Row was presented by Hugh Stevens and
the producer was Rebecca Stratford. What role should religion play in how we
choose our leaders? That's a question for a debate on tonight's Moral Maze. It's
coming up in a couple of minutes. We are making changes to the way BBC live
streams are distributed via third party services and platforms and the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you are listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds.