TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 video app and we listen to the annoying sounds of the future. This is the BBC
World Service, the world's radio station. BBC World Service, this is Chris
Morris with The Real Story, one topic, one hour every week. And this week,
China's population is falling and so is its birth rate, and it's all happening
much faster than many experts had predicted. After decades when a one-child
policy was ruthlessly enforced as a measure of population control, the Communist
Party is now desperate for Chinese citizens to have more children. But is that
what people want? Can they afford it? The economic effects of a rapid population
decline will be profound, both for China and the rest of the world, which has
grown accustomed to China's global industrial power. A smaller labour force and
an ageing population will put unprecedented demands on healthcare and welfare
systems, and on society in general. China's not the only country in the world
facing huge demographic challenges, but nowhere else are they more acute or
consequential. That's The Real Story from the BBC, coming up after the news. BBC
News, hello, I'm Gareth Barlow. The Colombian government says that a group of
more than 80 people who were taken hostage by protesters in the south of the
country have been released. Most were police officers who'd been trying to clear
roadblocks. The protesters want an energy company exploring for oil in the
region to fulfil its promises to improve local roads. Our America's editor,
Leonardo Rocha, explains how the hostage's release was secured. From the
beginning, the government of Gustavo Petro made it clear that he wanted a
negotiated solution. There were calls for the deployment of troops. The
president indicated that he would deploy troops if necessary. But initially he
said he was going to send a government minister there to negotiate. And
eventually two government ministers went to the region in the south of Colombia
to welcome the hostage. So I believe there were back negotiations to have them
freed quickly and without any harm. The head of the African Union has
congratulated the winner of Nigeria's presidential election elections,
Bolotinabu, as his defeated rivals challenge the result. A court has given the
second and third place candidates, Atiku Akubaka and Peter Obi, permission to
access materials held by Nigeria's electoral commission, allowing them to
prepare a possible legal challenge. Here's our reporter Simijola Osho. Both
Atiku Akubaka and Peter Obi have used very strong words to describe the election
outcome. One called it a rape of democracy, the other called it a robbery. And
Peter Obi's party, the Labour Party, they were insistent from early on that they
would fight Bolotinabu's win in court and they seemed very determined to do so.
But I guess this all depends on what they're able to find from the materials
they now have access to. The Roman Catholic Church in Portugal has asked victims
of child sex abuse for forgiveness, following a report by an independent inquiry
that found that nearly 5,000 children had been abused by clergy since 1950.
Bishops were meeting in the city of Fatima. Alison Roberts reports. The bishops
announced plans to make public gestures of contrition and at some point a
monument to victims. They also pledged to act on suggestions made by the
independent commission that produced the report, such as setting up a group to
hear from victims who have yet to come forward. But the details were scant and
victim support groups were quick to criticise what they saw as a lack of
decisive action, particularly regarding priests on a list of alleged abusers
handed to bishops. Church officials said that no cleric could be suspended
without firm evidence. Trade unions in Sri Lanka have warned of further strikes
in response to the announcement of steep tax rises and public spending cuts. The
government says the measures are needed to secure a bailout loan of nearly $3
billion from the International Monetary Fund. You're listening to the latest
world news from the BBC. Officials in the Indonesian capital Jakarta say that at
least 17 people are known to have died in a huge fire at a state-run fuel depot.
Dozens more people were injured, many with severe burns. The fire broke out on
Friday evening at the depot in the north of the city and engulfed nearby houses
before it was put out. The head of the European Union delegation to the
Palestinian territories has called for those behind a deadly rampage in the
occupied West Bank village of Huwara to be brought to justice. Israeli settlers
set fire to the house.