TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 6 o'clock. This is Alan Smith. Good evening. The UK and the
European Union appear to be on the brink of completing a new Brexit deal for
Northern Ireland. Certainly the deal isn't done yet, but I do think we are
inching towards a conclusion. We'll consider the crucial role the Democratic
Unionist party will play in any agreement. Police have been held in County
Tyrone in support of the police officer who was shot and critically wounded by
gunmen. There have been long queues at polling stations in Nigeria, where people
are electing a new president. And in sport, Wales and England are in the final
stages of a tense Six Nations clash in Cardiff. The government and the European
Union appear to be on the brink of finalising a new deal on post-Brexit trading
rules for Northern Ireland. The Irish Prime Minister, Leo Varadka, said the
talks were inching towards a conclusion and there was a possibility of a deal in
the next few days, but it was by no means guaranteed. A Downing Street source
described negotiations as positive. The current agreement means Northern Ireland
still follows some EU laws and goods arriving from Great Britain are subject to
checks. Our political correspondent, Ione Wells reports. The essence of a new
deal between the UK and the EU over trading arrangements for Northern Ireland is
basically there. Discussions between both sides are now focusing on how it is
unveiled and presented. The government is briefing politicians and business
stakeholders about it. King Charles was also due to meet the president of the
European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, in the UK today. Downing Street and
the Palace claim this was cancelled due to operational reasons unrelated to the
political talks. But her planned visit to the UK indicates a deal was about to
be publicly presented while she was here. Ireland's Prime Minister, Leo Varadka,
told reporters the talks were inching towards a conclusion. We're not quite
there yet, but there is ongoing engagement involving the UK government,
involving the European Commission and of course the Irish government has plugged
into that. I think it's fair to say we are inching towards a conclusion and
there is the possibility of agreement in the next few days, but by no means
guaranteed. Rishi Sunak has been trying to shore up support for a deal among
some critical Tory MPs and the Democratic Unionist Party. Critics are concerned
that politicians in Northern Ireland may still not get full control over future
EU laws that could apply there. The government knows this may be a case of
giving everyone some things they need if you can't give anyone everything they
want, but political battles with his own MPs and the DUP could still lie ahead
for Rishi Sunak. As we've heard, the reaction of the Democratic Unionist Party
to any deal between the government and the European Union will be key. Our
Northern Ireland political editor, Endik McClafferty, has this assessment of the
choices facing the party. The moment of truth is fast approaching for the DUP,
but don't expect a quick response once the deal is published. The party will
want to study the legal text to see if it meets their seven demands. Though open
to interpretation in parts, these demands deal with removing trade barriers
across the Irish Sea and restoring Northern Ireland's sovereign place in the UK.
Fixing what they see as the democratic deficit will also be key. Expect to see a
beefed up role for the Assembly when it comes to deciding what EU legislation
will apply in Northern Ireland. But will it simply amount to more of a say in
the decision making process stopping short of a veto which the EU insists it
will not allow? That will be key and may require some constructive ambiguity to
allow both sides to sell the deal. Crucially, the new legal text which will
overlay the previous legislation will allow the DUP to claim the protocol has
been replaced. Though the EU will argue the protocol remains intact with its
original legal text unchanged. The party will also consult those businesses
struggling under the burden of the protocol. If it works for businesses on the
front line, then it adds more pressure on the DUP to say yes. Rallies have taken
place in County Tyrone in support of a police officer who is critically ill in
hospital after being shot earlier this week. Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell was attacked on Wednesday night at a sports centre in Ulma when he was
off duty. A fifth person was arrested last night in connection with the
shooting. Julian Fowler has spent the day in Ulma. John Caldwell was coaching an
under-15 football team when he was shot and critically injured. Around a
thousand people gathered at his club, Bearer Swifts, to march in a show of
solidarity for him and his family. They were led by young people from the club,
some of whom witnessed the attack and were joined by members of sporting
organisations from across the community, including the local Gaelic Football
Club. A rally was also held in the centre of Ulma, a town that is all too
familiar with the violence of the Troubles, 25 years after 29 people and unborn
twins died in a dissident Republican car bomb. This was a demonstration of unity
by ordinary people against the new IRA, who police believe carried out the
shooting. A demonstration that those who oppose the Good Friday Peace Agreement
have little public support and that the overwhelming majority do not want to see
a return to the violence of the past. Hundreds of protesters have gathered in
Skegnes, a new key to demonstrate against the housing of asylum seekers in the
towns. In Newquay, a separate rally was held in support of the migrants. There
were no arrests in either location. Polls have officially closed in Nigeria,
where three front-runners are thought to be in a tight contest to become the
country's next president. Almost 90 million people were eligible to vote, but
some polling stations opened late and others not at all. West Africa
correspondent Mayini Jones sent this report from Lagos. In a polling station
here, voters are frustrated. No electoral officials have shown up and they can't
cast their ballots. It's not clear whether this was due to poor management or a
deliberate attempt to suppress the vote. The level of engagement in this
election has been unusually high, particularly from young people. They're
desperate to choose a government that will address the country's ailing economy
and rising insecurity. 25-year-old Amara says no officials from the Independent
National Electoral Commission or INEC showed up at her polling station. I've
stayed here since past 10 and this is past 3 and they're not here. We've not had
anything. We've tried to call them. I have a Twitter account. I've been trying
to tag the INEC officials. So this is past 2. The election ends by 2pm, 2.30. So
a lot of people left and it was the right thing to do, to just leave because
there was nobody responding to us. So I think this is wrong. Nigeria is Africa's
most populous country and is projected to have the third largest population in
the world by 2050. Whoever runs the country for the next four years will
determine whether its young people will thrive within its borders. Already,
thousands of educated Nigerians have left the country. The number of Nigerians
granted work in visas in the UK has tripled since 2019. It's a brain dream the
country can't afford. Finance ministers from the major G20 countries who have
been holding talks in India have failed to agree a closing statement because of
differences over the war in Ukraine. The hosts, India, said Russia and China had
objected to parts of the document condemning Russian aggression. India issued
its own summary of the gathering, which said most members strongly condemned the
war. The deputy chair of the Environment Agency has called for massive
transformation to the way food is produced and distributed in the UK. A number
of supermarkets are limiting the sale of some fruit and vegetables, blaming bad
weather in Spain and North Africa. But British producers say other factors are
affecting production here, including high energy costs, Brexit and last year's
drought. Our business correspondent, Esit Khan, reports. Empty shelves in some
supermarkets this week have highlighted the vulnerabilities of the UK's food
supply chain and prompted some in the industry to call for change. Extreme
weather affecting imports from Spain and Morocco is a major factor in the
shortages, but some UK growers have also described putting off planting crops
due to high energy costs and low prices offered by supermarkets. Judith
Batchelor, who's the deputy chair of the Environment Agency, said it was time
for risks like climate change to be built into how our supply chains work. There
is an unprecedented number of different factors impacting the price of our food.
And that's not just here at home in the UK, but we're part of a massive global
food system that is extremely complicated and interlinked. And I think we are
seeing or facing into what needs to be a massive transformation of the way that
we produce, distribute and retail food. The National Farmers Union has called
for more support for the industry with things like energy costs. Helen Browning,
the chief executive of the Soil Association, who's also a farmer, described the
issues facing growers as deep and severe. We've obviously got the labour
shortages coming out of Brexit. We've had COVID. We've got the climate change
impacts, which are going to get only worse. And we really need to be thinking
about planning for water management, getting our soils in good heart and the
energy issues. But we've also had Ukraine and the feed price increases. We've
had avian flu in the poultry sector, TB and the cattle sector's ongoing
challenge. The British Retail Consortium says supermarkets have long established
relationships with farmers and understand the need for prices to be sustainable.
The government has highlighted the resilience of the UK supply chain and says
current shortages should be resolved in the next few weeks. But many of those
growing fresh produce in the UK believe the challenges could continue long
beyond that. Police searching for the sister-in-law of the actor Mackenzie
Crook, who went missing in West Sussex, say they've found her body. Laurel
Aldridge, who's the elder sister of the actor's wife, vanished on the 14th of
February from her home in the village of Warburton. Mackenzie Crook had made a
number of public appeals to find her. Police say they're trying to confirm the
identity of the woman. Police searching for the crew of a tugboat that
overturned off Greenock in Inverclyde yesterday have recovered two bodies.
They're understood to have been the only people on board when it capsised. The
search operation had involved divers, coast guard units and the RNLI. Now sport
and in the rugby union Six Nations, England and Wales are going head-to-head in
Cardiff after the Championship leaders Ireland were given a scare by Italy. With
all the details and a round-up of the rest of the day sport, here's Andrew
Lindsay. Wales want their first win of the Six Nations campaign in Cardiff. The
action's ongoing and Mike McCarthy's watching it. This is a match England must
win if they want to have a say in the destination of the Six Nations title this
year. They lead by 15 points to 10 in Cardiff. England struck in the first half
through winger Anthony Watson. Wales bounced back and briefly led after Lewis
Rees' summit pounced on a loose pass in midfield to run it all the way back.
England struck right back through Kyle Sinclair's coast range finish. England
have been the better side but it's tense and it's still close. Wales 10, England
15 with seven minutes to go. That's Mike McCarthy and the Championship leaders
Ireland remain on course for the Grand Slam. They beat Italy 34-20 in Rome's
Olympic Stadium. The visitors had to work hard for the win though. Italy
fighting back to within four points in the second half. The Ireland captain
James Ryan says improvements are needed before games against Scotland and
England next month. We showed good grit in the second half to get a result and
to go on there to win in the end. There's some missed tackle to Ireland but
that's the kind of brand of rugby they're trying to play. They're really
ambitious with their tactic. You can see today they played from anywhere but
from us we've got to be better defensively for sure. Leads have won their first
Premier League game since November beating Southampton 1-0. The leaders Arsenal
won by the same score at Leicester. Everton lost 2-0 at home to Aston Villa and
West Ham beat Nottingham Forest 4-0. Manchester City are away to Bournemouth
right now. They're 2-0 up approaching half time. Crystal Palace host Liverpool
later. Aberdeen took Livingston's sixth place in the Scottish Premiership
beating them 1-0. Strugglers Ross County beat the bottom side Dundee United 4-0.
And in tennis Andy Murray lost the Qatar Open final 6-4, 6-4 to Russia's Daniil
Medvedev. Andrew Lindsay. A letter written by the Pet Shop Boys star Neil
Tennant thanking Janice Long for playing the band's debut single on Radio 1 in
1984 has been discovered at a record shop in Altrincham. The note was tucked
into the sleeve of a 12-inch copy of West End Girls, bought by the shop owner in
a job lot of vinyl at an auction. Adam Porter has more details. The note,
written using a typewriter with wonky letters, is dated 12 April 1984, three
days after West End Girls was released. Tennant was still working as a
journalist at Smash Hits magazine. When Trevor Morris founded, he contacted the
auction house to check whether they'd known it was there and they insisted he
keep the find. This early version of the song was a significant false start for
the Pet Shop Boys. It stalled at number 133 in the UK charts and they were
dropped by their record label. It was later re-recorded with different lyrics.
Neil Tennant and Janice Long spoke about the episode on her show on Radio Wales
in 2020. The letter and the record it was inside have now been bought by a local
journalist for just £40. A minor earthquake shook parts of Wales overnight. The
epicentre of the magnitude 3.7 quake was about 12 miles from Mirthatidville, but
tremors were reported as far away as Birmingham. The British Geological Survey
said people had reported their whole house shaking and a bed seemed to move from
side to side. The headlines again – the UK and the European Union appear to be
on the brink of completing a new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. The Irish
Prime Minister Leo Varadka said the talks were inching towards a conclusion, but
a deal was by no means guaranteed. Rallies have been held in County Tyrone in
support of the police officer who was shot and critically wounded by gunmen.
There have been long queues at polling stations in Nigeria, where people are
electing a new president. In Rugby Union's Six Nations, England are leading
Wales in the closing stages in Cardiff. BBC News Read by Alan Smith Tara
Fitzgerald will be one of the guests on loose ends. She was of course Gloria,
the young woman with the flugelhorn in the film brassed off. She's now on stage
playing a violinist with MS. Loose ends with Clive Anderson and David Morrissey
is in a minute or two. First, Patio Connell has news of tomorrow's edition, a
broadcasting house. Good evening. The boss of Ukrainian Railways is our guest.
He's apologised for delays to the schedule during wartime after President
Biden's journey aboard Rail Force One. Back home brace for fruit and veg
shortages for weeks, say growers, but our reporter in the Netherlands says the
shells are heaving with tomatoes over there. We discuss, plus Radio 4 favourite
Michelle Hossain shares her family turnip recipe. Charles Spencer the Earl,
Irene Tracy, the professor known as the Queen of Pain, and Alva Ray, podcast
princess, will be our headliners and there could be Brexit news, just like every
Sunday. Join us if you can tomorrow morning at 9 here on BBC Radio 4. And now
here's Clive Anderson. Yes, thank you, Alan. Welcome to loose ends in a time of
toil and mould at the top of all our political parties. The current leader of
the Labour Party says their previous leader isn't going to be allowed to stand
as their candidate for the constituencies represented for 40 years. Well, of
course, these days the Conservatives change their leaders almost as often as
Boris Johnson hosted parties in number 10. Liberal Democrats and Greens come and
go before many of us have committed their names to memory. Then last week the
redoubtable SNP leader, Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon, suddenly fell
on her claymore. Two or three rivals have now emerged as front runners, all in
their 30s or 40s. Politicians in this country seem to be getting younger and
younger. In contrast to America, where the next presidential election is likely
to be contested between the same very senior citizens who fought each other last
time. Of course, now four years even older. Read my lips or turn your hearing
aid on. I'm not breaking any election promises. I can't remember I left my car
keys. I don't recall what I said on the campaign trail. Well, we have youth and
experience in this week's loose ends with the actor Danny Sapani here to tell us
about his latest TV drama The Diplomat, which is to be found on the Alibi
channel. And as it turns out, it was elsewhere all along. The one show's
wildlife reporter, Mike Dilger, is here to tell us about his book One Thousand
Shades of Green, in which he focuses on flora rather than fauna. And the
comedian, Alistair Beckett King, joins us to tell us about his first novel for
children. I think it's to be first of many. Anyway, it's called Mudder at the
Museum. We have music from Yasmin Lacy and Savona Stevenson and Steve Ketley.
And the distinguished actor David Morrissey is performing the role of co-host
today. Who are you bringing onto the loose ends stage? Hi, Clive. Well, my guest
today is the wonderful Tara Fitzgerald. She burst onto our screens in the 90s in
some of the best British movies and TV of that time. Hear my song, Brastoff and
Chamomile Lawn amongst them. And then, of course, she played Dr. Eve Lockhart in
the hugely successful TV series Waking the Dead. But she's currently appearing
in Tom Kompinski's Duet for One at the Orange Tree in Richmond. And I'm looking
forward to talking to her about this amazing revival. Well, we're all looking
forward to that. It's great. Just looking at your face, Tara, as you are being
described. Checking every word. That's a worry, isn't it? Those of us doing the
introducing. Let's start with Danny Sapani, whose extensive acting career has
seen him in any number of roles on stage and screen. Recent years in TV series
such as Killing Eve, The Crown, Halo, Harlots, Penny Dreadful, Motherfather Son,
as well as blockbuster movies such as Black Panther and Star Wars. But, Danny,
you're now in The Diplomat. It's a complex crime series set in Barcelona in the
world of diplomacy, dishonesty and international malfeasance. But you're not a
diplomat. You're a grieving and aggrieved father who we meet early on in the
first film. I play a guy called Colin Sutherland and he arrives in Barcelona to
identify his son who has died. We later find out through some sort of mysterious
situation and it gets darker and more mysterious as the series goes on. You're
clearly suspicious from the first. From the off. At the beginning of the
programme, there's an actress, Eva Akilade, who is apparently just a witness
trying to do her best to say, well, you may have had a bit of coke, you may have
been drunk, you shouldn't have been in the water. I've only seen a couple of
episodes, but I'm doubting whether she's a reliable witness. Well, yeah, I mean,
you start to feel that there's more to the story from the beginning and what you
learn. It's quite interesting, I suppose, because what do we know about our
children, really? Colin learns a lot about his son, some of it true and some of
it not so true and that leads to his suspicions. That's your storyline, as it
were. The series is set in the sort of consulate, the British Consuls in
Barcelona and they're dealing with all sorts of things, unexpected deaths, but
also lost passports, drunken hen nights, all those things they have to deal
with. All those things that happen with DBNs, distressed British nationals,
which is a kind of new thing for me to learn about. That's all of us, isn't it?
That's all of us, pretty much, yeah. But it's a great vehicle for all sorts of
stories and as I said, Colin's stories, bands over the six episodes, but there's
a new story each week that delights with all sorts of interesting mayhem. So
Sophie Rundell is playing the actual Consul. That's right, Laura Simmons, she
plays and she leads the show. And then there's Stephen Cree who arrives, who's a
Consul General or something and he looks a bit, from the off, he looks a bit
dodgy as well. So there's going to be... He can't help that. But yeah, there's
plenty of new characters that come in that make it even more interesting and
even darker and more mysterious as we go along. Has anyone had to use Consular
services as well abroad? I lost a passport once. In Bangkok, it's not fun. I
must say, I got arrested once and my whole team got arrested and the British
Consul and High Commission weren't particularly useful, I must say. Maybe that
was just you. Yeah, I could quite possibly. They've seen your show. And is this
a continuing series, Danny? Is there a life after this? It's a brilliant idea.
You could sort of go to a new city every year, couldn't you, really? I mean,
Barcelona was fantastic. So I would love to sort of return as another character.
It's hard to make it that you're going to come back again. But I presume the
series can go on forever. The series can go on forever. Because there's always
been, yeah. You could just move the characters to different cities all over the
world. So Barcelona, a jolly place to film in, beautiful sunshine, beautiful
city. But just looking at your CV, I assume you have filmed all around the
world. But I know Star Wars might have been filmed in Elstree. It was. The Black
Panther might have been filmed in. I was going to say, various green screens.
But I was very lucky to hold an old piece of Star Wars kit from the 1970s. And
it wasn't until I sort of held that kit that I really felt that I was in Star
Wars. Because otherwise, I was just surrounded by green screen. Feel the Force.
Yeah, feel the Force, literally. But yeah, I've been quite fortunate recently.
I've been in Turkey filming and also Atlanta, which is where Black Panther was
filmed. But you're, I mean, in that sense, made for life. Because, yeah, I mean,
it looks as though you're going to have plenty of work anyway. But you can just
go to fans conventions for Star Wars, for Black Panther, Halo, you're as well.
These are all things with big, big followings, obsessives. I don't know how else
to describe them. Yeah, yeah. I mean, certainly the Comic Con thing is massive,
isn't it? Yeah, I've never heard of that. All over the world. I did one in
Preston once, which was a bit of an eye-opener. Preston as well. So Atlanta,
Barcelona. Yeah, but definitely there's a big, I didn't sort of plan it, you
know, but the sci-fi shows, you know, Halo is very much a sci-fi. Yeah, and Star
Wars. And Star Wars. Yeah, I mean, it's huge. But my part was a post-production.
So they realized that there was something missing. And I was very fortunate.
You, you were missing. I was missing. I was missing. You've also done Indian
films. I have. Was that different again? Incredibly different. And does that
involve going to India? It does. It does. I've done three Indian films, one
filmed in London and two, one in Tamil Nadu and one in, near just outside in
Kerala. What language was the film being made in English or in Tamil? No, it was
Mayalam. So I was speaking in a different language. Everything in all the films
in India get dubbed afterwards. So sometimes it might be your voice or sometimes
it might be somebody else's. Were you speaking English on the day? No, I was
speaking English in the first film. But in the second film, I was speaking a
different language. Wow. One of the five languages in India. I can't remember
exactly which one. How come you got into that? It was just once I'd done the
first film, which was called Singam 2. So it was the sequel to Singam 1. I
played a villain in that. But he was a British speaking character. And I got
such a huge following after that film, which, you know, I was literally randomly
picked by this director who'd seen my face and said, that's my guy. And so,
yeah, you're a villain. I was playing a villain. Your face. Screamed to villain.
Yeah, I'm afraid so. And the character in the film had the same name as I have,
Danny. So I... That can't be a reason you can't cast no. No, you never know.
You'll find me on the pretty easy axis. Yes, it's all right. Yeah. So but that
was an incredible experience. I got to work with Surya, who is a huge... I mean,
let me think of Tom Cruise of Tamil movie making. And yeah. And so I think that
led on to the second film. Anyway, The Dippermat begins on the 28th of February
at 9pm on Alibi, with the all episodes available on Sky and Virgin as well. So
we can all look forward to watching that. Thank you very much for coming. We
have some music now. And I'm delighted to welcome to Lucentz Yasmin Lacy, who's
about to release her first album, Voice Notes. And it's exciting, Yasmin, but
when you were on Lucentz before 2018, you'd already recorded your first EP,
Black Moon. Yeah. And you've been a couple of other EPs since then. But tell us
about this album. This album, yeah. So out on the 3rd of March, and it is a
collection of stories or my responses to what's been going on around over the
past couple of years, you know, usual themes, some heartbreaks, some changes,
some growth. Plenty of heartbreaks in it. Soul, would you call it? Lover's
Rotten Chairs? Yeah. Soul. Yeah. Music From the Soul for the Soul. But there's
some there's some bit of Lover's Rock in there as well. Yeah. One of the tracks,
you're not doing this one now, but Bad Company, you tell us about your inner
demon. Yeah. She's called Priscilla. I've called her Priscilla. What's she like?
A nightmare. She's the bad side of you or the bad. Yeah, bad, but also, you
know, Priscilla is probably at the forefront of like, Priscilla is probably the
one that gets on stage. It's quite nerve wracking, she's got a lot more, you
know, about her. Is there a sort of a nicer version? Have you got Angelina or
somebody testing with Priscilla? Just Priscilla and me, basically. Yeah. Just
the two of us. You're back living in London now. I think you were last time when
you were in Nottingham and you're doing and you're doing youth work for quite a
while. I was. Was there a sort of hesitation about going into music full time?
Yeah, I mean, I never I never set out to do music and it wasn't like I hated my
other job. I actually really loved it. I just was like, OK, if I get more work
in one or the other, I'll just sort of go with that. And then I got quite a few
gigs and still getting it. So I'm here. Well, I was going to mention you've got
a gig at the St Pancrasole Church next month. It's hardly worth it. It's sold
out already, isn't it? Yeah. We'll mention mothers afterwards. But what are you
going to be performing today? I'm going to be performing Pieces, which is from
Voice Notes. So it's you and you've got Sarah Tandy here to accompany you on our
piano. So where we go? Jasmine Lacy. I'm going to be performing Pieces, which is
from the St Pancrasole Church next month. And I'm going to be performing Pieces,
which is from the St Pancrasole Church next month. And I'm going to be
performing Pieces, which is from the St Pancrasole Church next month. So if
you're going to be performing Pieces, you're going to be performing Pieces,
which is from the St Pancrasole Church next month. And I'm going to be
performing Pieces, which is from the St Pancrasole Church next month. And I'm
going to be performing Pieces, which is from the St Pancrasole Church next
month. And I'm going to be performing Pieces, which is from the St Pancrasole
Church next month. And I'm going to be performing Pieces, which is from the St
Pancrasole Church next month. And I'll do the same. This was never a vein. No,
no. No, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no, no. an interactive murder
mystery on Twitter. So every day for a week, I got my partner to do different
1930s hairstyles, and I played a variety of suspicious characters who had
committed a murder. And an editor from Walker Books got in touch with me and
said, have you thought about writing for children? Which I know is not how
you're supposed to get published. What you're meant to do is you're meant to
write a manuscript and then carry, you know, carrying it on your back. You're
meant to slog from building to building with people slamming the door in your
face. Now, this is a more modern day. You're putting stuff out there and people
are actually seeing it and saying, oh, that sounds like that would work for
children. Whatever you want. Yeah, this stuff you're producing, it seems like
children might enjoy it. Yeah. So the central premise at the heart of this book
is the small girl changes her look. Yes. So she looks like a grown-up detective.
Exactly. So it's a bit like almost Shakespearean, that way. Thank you. Yes. The
first person to compare my writing to Shakespeare, I'm supposed to many, I hope.
Not as in the writing, but the concept where you see, you know, as you like it
or something, and we accept the fact, oh, yes, she looks exactly like she did
when she had a woman's frock on. Now she's got her trousers on. Nobody can
recognize it. It was the first thing I said to the editor, I said, as in
Jacobean drama, disguise is impenetrable, in my writing. So Bonnie Montgomery is
10 years old, and she's brilliant at solving murders. But if you're 10 years old
and a schoolgirl, you're not allowed to get involved in murder cases. So she has
to put on a big mustache, a beret and a raincoat, and do a sort of a steadily
dodgy impersonation of the actor David Suchet playing Poirot. And she passes
herself off extremely convincingly as the mysterious foreign detective,
Montgomery Bonbon. And it's in a museum called the Hornville Museum. Yes. Was
that inspired by the Horniman Museum at the moment? Well, the legal reasons, I
will say, no. But the Horniman Museum does have its overstuffed walrus, which
I'm a huge fan of. Yes. And in the Hornville Museum in the book, Abelard
Hornville, the founder, has put all the animals together wrong. Yes. So you may
draw conclusions from that. Well, I just... I won't be drawn on that issue. All
right. But so anyway, the lights go out in the museum, a dead body emerges. And
there's lots of jokes in there for the children and for grownups, I think. I
think it's a funny book. There's definitely jokes. It's also, I tried to do a
fair play, Murder Mystery. You know, there's an element of locked room in there.
So I think there's a good chance people will at least solve some of the clues.
You know, I want the... There was one I spotted early on. But not that it helped
me solve the... Who was the murderer? But... I see what's going on there. Well,
there's a very easy clue that I put in. Yes, that's the one I spotted. To keep
the children happy. I wanted to make sure... I'm there at the 10-year-olds. I'm
there with them. I wanted to make sure the younger readers and Clyde Anderson
had something. So stand up, Comdee. Are you back doing that now or do you think
being an author, you'll be now sitting at home just writing books or... Oh, that
would be lovely, wouldn't it? Just to never leave the house. You're on tour. I
think you're on tour. Yes. Now that it's legal again, not just... It wasn't just
me who was banned. We were all banned. But now that we're allowed, I'm out on
tour. I'm doing stand up and stand up comedy is fantastic. I love it. It's so
different from writing books because when you're doing jokes, the audience tells
you like every 30 seconds if it's working. You get feedback at the end of every
sentence. Whereas with a kid's book especially, it was published before any
children read it. So the actual audience don't get to read it until like two
weeks ago when it came out. Finally, I'm getting kids saying, Oh, I liked your
book, which is so nice because up until this point, authors really have to hold
their nerve. People worry about what should be in books for children, but murder
is all right. Kids love a bit of murder. I get to go to schools with it and say,
who likes murder? And the kids are like, Well, we love it. But are you worried
it might be edited out? You know with, you know, Rold Dahl, his books have been
popular with children for decades. And now somebody's going through the fine-
tooth comb and taking out everything that might some way offend somebody. I
think the straightest thing about that is that the edits are like, they're just,
I'm sorry to whichever editor did it, but they're just poorly written. I feel
like sort of the brand for Roldahl is, I'm a horrible old man telling you a
disgusting story. And I feel like there's a limit to how much you can clean that
up and still keep Roldahl. It is the USP of his work. So cutting it out is odd.
Yeah. You also do a podcast, Law Men. And it's not about the law, but about
folklore. L-O-R-E. Yeah. That's another interest of yours, obviously. A huge fan
of folklore, the sort of the weird. What we do is, James Shakeshaft and I, my
co-host, we don't do the legends that have had the Hollywood treatments like
Robin Hood and Loch Ness Monster. It's the things that you have to be in that
town to have heard of. You know, like, oh, there's a haunted well. There's a
witch. That street has the ghost of a duck on it that was beheaded by the
villagers. It's the really weird ones that haven't had the story editor come in
and make it all make sense. Is that true? There is a haunted duck. I can't
remember. Somewhere in the Cotswolds, there's the village. There was a duck.
You're making yourself. No, no. It's near Stoke, but S-T-O-A-K. Not Stoke,
Stoke, the other Stoke. There was a duck that was menacing the villagers. So
they cut his head off and then it came back as a ghost and continued to menace.
That is brilliant. It's like a zombie duck. Yes. Alistair Beckett King, thanks
for coming. Murder at the Museum, his book, illustrated by Claire Powell. Well,
that's out now and it's one for 10 year olds and upwards. Eight to 12. Eight to
12. Eight to 12. Okay. All right. Over to you, David. Thanks, Clive. Tara
Fitzgerald is no stranger to playing a musician in the groundbreaking British
film, Brass Off. She played Gloria, the girl with the flugelhorn who shook up
the grimly, coloury brass band, not least of all distracting Ewan McGregor from
his trumpet practice. But now she's giving a tour de force performance as
Stephanie Abrahams in Tom Kipinski's duet for one at the Orange Tree Theatre
here in London. Tara, welcome to the show. Thank you, David. So tell us, I saw
the show the other night, it's fabulous, but tell us a little bit about
Stephanie and who she is and what happens to her at the start of the play. Yeah,
so it's a play that was written by Tom Kipinski, as you said, it was written in
the 80s and for Francis de la Tour. And Stephanie Abrahams is a virtuosic
violinist, but she has contracted multiple sclerosis. So her ability to play her
instrument has been taken away and her husband thinks it's a good idea for her
to go and get some counselling from a psychiatrist. So the play takes us through
six sessions with the psychiatrist and her resistance, her initial resistance to
the whole process, I think is how you start. Maureen Beattie plays the wonderful
Maureen Beattie. Brilliant, Maureen Beattie. The therapist. It's quite an
unusual setup because, you know, we're used to therapists being sort of touchy
and feeling and very sort of, you know, sort of, you know, come in and touch,
but she's quite combative, isn't she? She really goes for it. She's great. Yeah.
And that as an audience is quite surprising that she takes her on. Yeah. I mean,
how does that feel? Well, I mean, you know that it was written originally for a
man. Right. And this is the first time it's been played by two women. So
immediately that gives it something. It does. It really does change the dynamic.
Yeah, and the research that they're both undertaking into sort of their
histories, you know, their parents automatically the dynamic is different again.
But I think for Stephanie, the combativeness is a necessary approach. I think
that's probably her reading of her character. Right. I mean, she's so in denial
or locked off or unaware or not in touch with her feelings and actually very
reluctant to engage. So she's being challenged about her actual condition? Not
about, I mean, her actual condition is true. Yeah. So but her acceptance or lack
of acceptance for her condition. Her attitude towards it. Yeah, her attitude
towards it is definitely pressing. Because the other thing that comes out, which
is wonderful, is the fact that here is someone who's, you know, the joy of her
life, which is playing the violin, has been taking away from her. But the
therapist wants to mine her acceptance and non-acceptance around it. And that
becomes about her relationship with her husband, her relationship with her
father and mother, and her history of how she got there. And I think that's
what's wonderful about the play is the fact that, you know, she has this illness
that could take away something that she loves. Yeah. The therapist is trying to
build her back up again. Yeah, exactly. So I think there's a sort of that
approach is this that destruction to reform kind of approach. And obviously, it
deals with the grief cycle, you know, or the denial cycle or whatever it is. But
I think the reason the play lives, as you say, and works so well is because
actually the MS is a side. Yes. It's not really about that. It's about the fact
that she is losing the thing that she lives for. And she's an artist and she
can't, you know, whatever type of artist you are, if you're not able to create,
you lose that possibility. She cannot see anything else for her. But was that a
starting point for you when you're looking at Stephanie thinking about what did
you have? Obviously, you're acting and stuff to be taken away from you. The
thing that we all sort of get up for in the morning. She talks about music as
magic at one point. Yeah. And you think, well, what's my magic? Yeah,
absolutely. What would I do? Somebody, I mean, you know, you're raised on debt.
We've also been through lockdown recently. This I think of like the thing I love
has been taken away from me. How do I function? Did you start with that? Exactly
that and exactly what you were just saying. You know, it's this is the thing you
do. This is the thing, you know, you can give, you know, you're able to bring
something different, maybe change the way somebody feels. If you can't do that,
then what is your purpose? And she can't, she's not a polymath, you know, she
can't see what else you might be able to do. Is this reflecting the Jacqueline
Dupre story with her position at Gello? And I think it was, well, originally
everyone believed it was written based on her life and that subsequently I
understand he might have said it wasn't exactly, but the parallels are so
strong. I mean, she was with Baron Boyman, my character in this is with a
comparable conductor, composer. So, you know, I think and she has MS and she,
you know, she's young, obviously quite young. Yeah, very young. Because also,
because children, the whole thing is about children as well, isn't it? Because
she doesn't have children. So it's that thing of like putting everything into
your craft and sacrificing your young life and therefore motherhood to this. I
mean, it was so rich. I mean, where do you, I mean, it's quite a daunting
prospects from just the technical point of view, lines wise. But then are you
meeting classical musicians? Are you looking at MS sufferers? Are you doing
that? I did all that. Yeah, I mean, it really needed it. It's a chunky great
thing, you know, and I didn't want to do it a disservice at all. You know, to
me, it feels quite an important piece and important play and perhaps one that
hasn't fully been realised yet. Yeah, when it was first done with Francis, it
was played for a year. That's right. I mean, could you imagine yourself doing it
for that? I mean, she must have such stamina. Really? But I mean, you know, you
never feel that watching it. But afterwards, when I was traveling home, I
thought, God, you're doing that every night. And it's so not just technically,
but emotionally what you give every night is unbelievable. I mean, also the fact
is, it's in the round. Right. And it is just us sat focusing on each other, you
know, in this sort of moving stage situation, this dialogue, very intense. You
come off for seconds to change a top and go back on again, you know, so it's
very... And we have a violinist in the play as well. Isn't she wonderful? So
there's a wonderful during the scene change, there's this wonderful sort of
violinist who comes on and plays and you look at her. Yeah. We know that there's
the connection between you, her and the music. It's a fantastic play. It's a
wonderful performance. It's at the Orange Tree. It's till the 18th of March, I
think. So I urge everyone to get down there because it's fantastic. Thanks,
Steve. Thank you, David and Tara Fitzgerald. Music now from Savona Stevenson and
Steve Ketley, who together have released the Wine of Life, an instrumental album
bringing together the Klassack, which is the Gallic or Celtic harp, which has
been known since ancient times, and the saxophone, the brass, but woodwind
instrument first created by Adolf Sax in 1840. You're very used to doing lots of
different collaboration, different styles of music, classical folk, jazz. And
you debuted in London when you were 15, is that right? Yes, with Ralph McTill,
Fairport Convention and Steel Ice Band. I don't think I knew what was happening
to me. But you were composing even before then. Well, my father was a composer
pianist, so I started composing at the age of five and had all sorts of
incredible musicians visiting the house. So there wasn't any choice. We just
ate, slept, lived music. And your music's been heard in, well, the memorial
concert for the late Queen and also in Sex and the City. So quite a fan. And
you're championing this form of harp as well as the pedal harp. But is it the
same as the harp they have in Ireland or is it? It is. The Klassack is the same
as the Irish harp and they have the same harp in Brittany as well. Steve, you
lead your band Steve Ketley's Odd Times and Orange Clawhammer, which is
dedicated to playing the music. Is Captain Beefar? Captain Beefar, yes. So now,
is this a departure for you to be... This is my gentle side, which the other
ones definitely aren't. So, you know, the Captain Beefar thing, I've been a fan
since I was sort of 17 and dropped my script. I got to get his difficult
masterpiece. So it's not really a tribute band. We do our own thing with it. You
interpret it. You reinterpret it. Yeah. I even sing a bit. Not today, though.
But what brought you two together? Are you old friends? We are, yeah. We are.
And we... Yes, I suppose my marriage broke up and I said to Steve, let's go on
the road. That's the whole idea of the album as well, being written during
lockdown. And the fact of, you know, I've got more to give yet. Let's not be...
Let's see the glass half full. Yeah. OK. One day people will do non-lockdown
albums and books. Yes. Can't wait. All right. So which track are you going to
do? Tell us if you need to introduce... We're going to do one called The
Bookworm, which I originally wrote for the BBC Scottish radio programme, the
book programme. So it seems suitable for the BBC down here. Definitely. So away
we go. So Vorna Stevenson and Steve Catley. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, so Vorna Stevenson and Steve Catley
with Class Saxophone Music. That was their track Bookworm from Wine of Life,
their album which is available now. Now let's come to Mike Dilder, who is a
familiar face on BBC TV's The One Show, where he's the programme's wildlife
reporter. Mike, you've travelled extensively in South America, Asia, making,
producing, presenting, all sorts of other wildlife programmes as well. But,
Mike, in your book One Thousand Shades of Green, a year in search of Britain's
wild plants, you stay closer to home and close to the ground, looking for and
looking at sometimes quite obscure, unobtrusive flowers, plants, dare I say
weeds, which some of us may walk by without observing a good deal of the time.
You dare say weeds? Yes. Absolutely, Clive. I feel at this point I should have
mentioned the Covid pandemic. I don't think we've talked about that. I mean, in
terms of the genesis of the book, the only time we were allowed out was our
daily dog walks with my son Zachary, and I'd be walking all around. And I'm a
little bit like Rain Man with wildlife. I mean, I've got birding Tourette's, so
even if people aren't interested, I'll shout out their names. I had to walk
around and sort of ring their poke-eats. Yeah. And I know birds incredibly well.
I know mammals pretty well. And so I'm always casting around looking to try and
learn something. The day you stop learning is the day you die. And I started
looking at the flowers at my feet. And I knew the dandelions and the dices and
the daffodils, but I didn't really know what the forget-me-nots were or the
violets. So I did something monumental, Clive. I took out a plant book, and it
just basically took the handbrake off, and I started identifying plants, and I
went, frankly, bonkers, and just entered into this amazing world. And for me, it
was my green mental health, and that was brilliant. Interesting. You say you
studied botany at university, and your wife's a similar topic, but that's not
part of the course, to be able to identify all the plants. I think you can get a
PhD in botany without knowing the difference between really basic plants. I
think there's a survey, and you can get your O level, or A level in biology, and
not even be able to name six plants. So Bluebell, Stacey, Primrose, Campion. You
go to trees. You can get... You can still get an A, and you don't know any more
from that. But this way you set about it is quite a... I don't want to be too
pejorative, but it's quite a train-spottery way that you were doing it, because
you weren't just saying, I'm going to identify each plant I come to. You set
off... You wanted to get to a thousand. I was a train-spotter at one point. I
think there's a natural progression. Well, there comes through, I think. I am a
big lister. I mean, I have a raincoat, and I'm a bit of a nerd like that. I'm a
wildlife obsessive. And so, yeah, what I started to do was I had this idea about
trying to see a thousand plants in a year, and a lot of them would seem really
close to home, because that's the beauty. You can go outside and see
cosmopolitan weeds, and I love weeds. They're fascinating. But quite soon, in
the book, you're going, oh, there's an old quarry, and up the edge of one side
of it, in the sunshine, you'll get this very obscure thing. And you don't even
know when you've found it, really. You have to take a photograph of it and try
and see, and get experts in. So I've spotted it. I really have. Well, you talk
about that quarry. I went to this quarry face to look for this plant called
Early Starve of Bethlehem, the only place it grows in the whole of the British
Isles. And I'm not as young as I used to be, and I was up this cliff face, and I
looked down, and I was on the edge of this precipice, and I thought, if I fall
now, at best it's an ambulance, at worst it's a hearse. But I found this plant,
I found the leaves, and only one in a thousand plants actually flower. And I
thought, I'll take the leaves. It's another botanical thick, as you say. And
then I almost found myself kneeling on this plant, and there's a little
beautiful yellow flower, like Lesser Salandine, and a little tear came to my
eye. I was so blown away. I found it myself. You found it... Well, I knew it was
there, but whether I could find it or not was another matter. Did our foliage
change during lockdown, because we're not driving and things like that? Was
there a big change in our environment? I think a lot of people really enjoyed
wildlife during lockdown, David. People were saying, like, the birds are singing
louder. The birds could be heard above the traffic. I would walk around my
village in the chief's stoke. I could hear the birds. I mean, I think probably
the wildlife didn't do too badly. Although I interviewed Alison Steadman, the
actress, about wildlife in lockdown, because it's massive for her. And she said
that she went into the parks, and the problem was that everybody went to the
local parks and everyone was stomping on the plants. There was another one. I've
come which flower it was now, but your son was doing tree climbing, and he fell
out of a tree. Yes. And it's a lucky break all round, because he landed near one
of the plants you were looking for. A Spurge Lowell. That's the one, yes. Yeah,
a Spurge Lowell. All of a sudden it's like it kind of...flowers really in the
year. It's a kind of greeny, yellowy flower. It's only found in limestone
woodland. And I know you love woodland, but... I do, yes. President of the
Woodland Trust. Yeah. And Zachary almost fell on the plant, and I was like, get
in there, you weaker! But, you know, when I started off, I was really worried
that I wouldn't be able to identify a lot of the plants that didn't find them.
And it wasn't just flowers. I was doing things like grasses, sedges, rushes,
ferns, all these weird ones that people ignore and walk past. And I was really
worried about identifying them. They're hard to tell apart from, because then
they cross breed, don't they? They can hybridise, but when you drill down into
the detail and you look at the utricles of a sedge... Oh, I love that. I love
the... The utricles of the sedge. One of my favourite ones. Oh, man, I could
examine a neutral for a long time. And they're terribly naughty. I was talking
about the book, because their title is called A Thousand Shades Of Green, and
the title might have been ripped off from a rather well-known book with a
different colour, a different number. And I gave a talk saying, this book is
nowhere near as saucy. And a chap came up to me after, he was going, you do
realise flowers is all about sex? So, actually, your book is distinctly more
filthy than a 50. Yes. You've got an orchid in there who's... Not only is an
orchid, that's also... Very fruity. Yeah, but the roots as well have a... Have a
cheeky shape. You're right. Early purple orchid, orchis mascula. That's the one,
yeah. Because the tubers just look like testicles. So it's called orchis, it's
Greek for testicle. Yeah. A mascula, I think we can all work that one out. Yes.
So the scientific names... Double the... So interesting. Yeah. Oh. I've got an
app called Nature ID, which has been very good. And when we were in Barcelona, I
saw this tree that looked like a sort of mace with lots of spikes on it. Oh. And
cotton sprouting, and I sort of looked it up, and it just had this incredible
history. I can't remember the name of the... Let's call it the cotton tree. I
didn't know that they used the cotton for pillows, but it was just an
extraordinary looking tree. Those apps are brilliant, actually. Yeah. Take a
picture, Danny, and there's people online who will kind of tell you what it is.
But it's like the joy of wildlife is certainly during lockdown. I mean, it was
my saviour and my sanctity, and a lot of people who don't normally watch
wildlife told me that. And it's really... I think plants... There's a thing
called plant blindness. People know birds. They love feathers. They love fur.
But they're not really interested in chlorophyll. I mean, that's the bed and
breakfast of the nation's fauna. Chlorophyll is the new rock and roll. And I
want to get more people into plant spotting. The most impressive thing is
mention of your son, Zachary, who might have gone either way on this. He might
have been put off plants forever by you. But he seems to be sort of following in
your footsteps for a moment. Well, he wasn't that excited by birds, but kids
have got amazing visual acuity, and he's lower to the ground, so he's closer to
the plants. So he would have this amazing propensity, Clive, to find the best
plants. Right. Especially... And my dog would wee on them as well. Yes. It's
astonishing. Well, Dil, we're going to stop there. One Thousand Shades of Green
is out now. That's the loose ends tied up for another week. If you've just
missed the program, if you want to hear it again, it's waiting for you in the
treasure trove. That is BBC Sounds, including interviews with Felicity Kendall
and Mark Steele from a couple of weeks ago. But thank you to this week's guests,
Mike Dilger, Alastair Beckett King, Danny Sapani, Yasmin Lacey, Savona Stevenson
and Steve Ketley, David Morrissey and Tara Fitz-General. Today's producer is
Suki Firth. The studio managers are Gail Gordon and Mike Millam. Next week, my
guests will include Richard Curtis and Ben Bailey-Smith. But for me for now,
goodbye. Loose Ends was presented by Clive Anderson. And if you'd like to listen
to any of the recent music performances on the show, just go to BBC Sounds. And
we're sticking with a musical theme next this evening. Shirley J. Thompson is
one of Britain's top classical composers and she's been invited to write new
music for King Charles Coronation. We'll be hearing more about that on Profile
just after the news. Later this evening at nine there's crime drama. But before
that, at eight o'clock, we'll be learning more about the art form that is the
radio play. You can literally go anywhere at the snap of your fingers. For 100
years, the BBC... We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third-party services and platforms. And the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds. So much more to happen on radio. Dramatic Beats. On Radio
4 and BBC Sounds.