TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 around you. The Gold Watch on BBC iPlayer. BBC News at 11 o'clock. In the last
hour, Shamima Begum has lost her appeal against the government's decision to
strip her of her British citizenship. Ms Begum was 15 when she travelled from
the UK into territory controlled by Islamic State. Her British citizenship was
taken away when she was found in a Syrian refugee camp in 2019. Her lawyers
argued the Home Office had failed to consider that she was a victim of child
trafficking. The Home Office says she poses a risk to national security. Anthony
Glees is a security expert from the University of Buckingham. She wasn't the
only person who'd been stripped of her citizenship. About 150 people, we're
told, have also been stripped. All of them would have appealed and had she come
back to the United Kingdom, whatever her own views were, she would have been
treated as an icon. The politics of it were wrong, but the bottom line is this
is the law. The government has been found not to have broken the law. British
Steel has announced plans to close its coking ovens in Scunthorpe with the loss
of up to 260 jobs. The company's Chinese owners say they face significant
challenges because of high inflation and energy costs. Unions say the move will
be devastating for Scunthorpe and British Steel workers across the UK. The Royal
College of Nursing will hold pay talks with the Health Secretary Steve Barclay
this afternoon. The union has paused plans for a 48-hour strike from next
Wednesday and says it's confident of reaching a fair settlement. China and
Russia have reaffirmed their close relationship, promising further agreements
between the two countries. China's top diplomat Wang Yi promised more deals on a
trip to Moscow where he met the Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov. Mr Wang
is later expected to meet President Putin. Around 200 health, sport and fitness
groups have urged the Prime Minister to provide more support for leisure
facilities with high energy costs. In an open letter to Rishi Sunak, they say
many swimming pools, leisure centres and gyms in England were at risk of closing
once the government scales back its energy relief scheme in April. BBC News. Now
on BBC Radio 4 we continue the Shamima Begum story presented by Josh Baker. What
happens on the day you're released? Can you take me through that day? Well it
was a shock. I thought I was a dead man walking. These guys are going to kill
me. Sure of it. Then all of a sudden I get put into a van and I get dropped off
somewhere in the middle of Raqqa. Of course I was happy. It's euphoric. It was
just a normal day. I was sitting in my room. It was the morning and there was a
knock at the door. My husband came in and we just stared at each other and then
we didn't say anything. We just hugged each other. Gave my wife a very, very,
very strong hug. She was very happy to see me as well. It was a very, very nice
moment, yeah. Were you surprised? Yeah, I was really surprised. I was surprised
and happy though that he was out and that he was not a spy. Shamima Begum says
her husband, Yago, spent seven months in prison. ISIS had accused him of being a
spy just 10 days into their marriage. Now he's been released. We got an
apartment of our own. Got to spend some time with her, got to know her. It was
nice. A bit of personal space. You could do whatever you want. You could walk
through the house whenever you want. No limitations. It was a nice time. Once we
had moved out of the Egyptian family's house, it was just me and my husband. He
was a very different person than when I first married him. He was just like very
quiet and reserved and yeah, just didn't show his emotions as much. You know, it
was hard for him to stay in ISIS after everything that they'd done to him. He
didn't want to continue being there. He didn't want to fight for them. Do you
remember the moment that you became disillusioned? Yeah, after I got out of
prison. It's like, what the heck is this? Where did I come to? So it wasn't when
you were doing any of the fighting or anything before. It was when you went to
prison. That's the point where you changed your mind about the caliphate. I
guess so, yeah. He had no friends because he found out that all his friends were
talking about him while he was in prison. He was just like, all his friends were
talking about him while he was in prison. So he just cut them all off. So he
only had me and I only had him. And that was hard. You start to lose your mind
when you're just only stuck with each other. What is a woman's place in ISIS?
Just a wife and a mother. That's it. That's it. Just those two words. That's
what you're reduced to in ISIS, a wife and a mother. When you talk about your
husband, how would you characterize your relationship with him? I don't. I think
I just, I don't know, he just told me what to do and I did it. That's it. That's
our relationship. Because my personality is very quiet and reserved, so it
wasn't that hard for me to obviously do what he tells me to do. But sometimes it
was depressing when he wouldn't let me go see people or do things or just go
outside in general. How was his behavior towards you in that period? Just taking
out his anger and frustration on me because of the situation he was in. Was that
abusive? Yeah. Unfortunately, she had a miscarriage. It was a bit difficult for
her. After prison, would you say you were ever abusive to Shamima in any way?
No. Did you two ever have any fights? In the beginning, I think we had like one
or two small little fights, but basically our marriage was very, very smooth.
It's gone very, very good. What would those fights look like? It was the
beginning of our marriage. We didn't really know each other too well. One time I
tried to help her in the kitchen. It didn't really work out too well. So we had
a bit of a fight. I screamed a bit and then that's the last time I went to the
kitchen. I wanted to feel loved and I felt unloved and worthless. No matter how
hard I tried, he just wouldn't accept me and just move on. I just feel trapped
and like I have nowhere to go. Did you ever try to leave ISIS? No. Why? Because
it was just too hard. What would have happened if you'd been caught? Probably
put in prison and tortured because they would assume that I'm a spy for wanting
to leave. Because if they could do it to my husband, then they could maybe do it
to me too, you know. Shamima Begum says she was isolated and living in an
abusive relationship. She thought she was coming to live in a utopia. But the
reality is a society built on oppression, brutality and dominated by the will of
men. She says she felt there was no way out. But her friend Khadiza, who she'd
travelled to Syria with, is thinking differently and wants to escape. I'm Josh
Baker. This is the Shamima Begum Story. Episode 7. Trapped. Okay, so I'm going
to start recording. It's late 2015 and while Shamima Begum and her friends are
in Syria, I'm in East London waiting for a call from Raqqa. I hate these waits.
Hi, how are you? You okay? It seems a lot busy in there. It's Khadiza. I'm
recording with her sister. Okay, are there any of your friends with you? Yeah,
Amira and Shamina are with me. Okay. She asks if it's safe to talk in Seleti, a
language spoken in Bangladesh. Khadiza is with her friends Amira and Shamina in
an internet cafe that's used by ISIS members. Do you walk through the park to go
to the internet cafe? Yeah. Walk through the park? Yeah, it's just straight up.
Okay, is there a chicken shop there? Yeah, kind of. Is it red? Yeah, I know it's
red. So this is where you are, okay. Khadiza's sister wants to work out exactly
where she lives because there's a plan to try and sneak her out of Islamic State
group territory. So how am I going to get out? You know the borders are closed
right now. I don't know if I want to do this because I don't feel, I don't have
a good feeling, I feel scared. What, you feel scared? Yeah. Why do you feel
scared? You know, if something goes wrong, like, that's it. I know what you
mean. I understand what you mean and it is, you know, from where you are I can
understand. But the only thing I would say to you is just trust us. After she
arrived in Raqqa, Khadiza married a Somali-American man who apparently worked in
a hospital. They moved to the ISIS-controlled city of Mosul in Iraq. There, they
stayed in a hotel that was famous throughout the so-called caliphate as the
terror group's luxury five-star destination. I've seen photos she took there of
a swimming pool surrounded by palm trees, marble floors and a grand chandelier.
It was sort of the ISIS version of the Ritz. But Khadiza's husband was soon
killed, likely in an airstrike. So she returned to Raqqa where she moved in with
two of her friends, whose husbands were also dead or missing. Amira, who she'd
left London with, and Sharmina, who'd convinced the girls to come to ISIS. It
was around this time that Khadiza decided she needed to escape. Did you know she
kind of maybe wanted to leave? No, because at that time, when all their husbands
died and one of their husbands left, my husband, like a week later, my husband
came out of prison, so I was just with him all the time and they were in their
own house together. And I think during that time, her family may have tried to
take advantage of the fact that she didn't have a husband and persuade her to
leave. And I guess it did work, she did want to leave at some point. How do your
friends feel about, you know, are they quite supportive? No, they don't know,
but seeing them to me, they're just scared. If it goes wrong, they'll be scared.
I know what you mean. You have to be careful. I understand that you're feeling
scared, yeah? But I don't trust your friends, you know, by the way. Why? I don't
know, I just kind of feel... You don't feel safe? I don't know, I just feel like
I'm not safe. I don't know, I just feel like I'm not safe. I don't know, I just
feel like I'm not safe. I just kind of feel like, what if they tell someone
or... No, no. But try and just keep, you know, as much away from them as you
can, yeah? Do you understand? Yes, Mum. I will speak to Mum. She's crying. Oh,
you know what, that might be the turn. Looking at the routes in and out, there's
only about four or five. The plan to get Khadija out of the so-called caliphate
started weeks ago. That would make sense. It's being orchestrated by Taz, the
lawyer who's been helping the families of the girls since they left. How do you
hide somebody in a town that small, when everyone's looking for you? It's not a
big town. In his office, surrounded by shelves stacked high with books, and a
cat that's trying to get his attention, he stares at satellite images of Raqqa.
There are towns around Raqqa where there are people who are friendly to helping
people come out. So essentially, these towns that you're looking at have safe
houses in? There are safe houses. The problem is, who do you trust and whose
safe houses do you trust? Taz is working with contacts in Turkey and Syria, who
are part of a network that smuggle people out of ISIS territory. He says they've
given him a plan for how they can help Khadija. ISIS allow for women to go on
their own for medical reasons. And so she would complain of a toothache, and
that she would need to visit a dentist. She would then go into a taxi relatively
regularly and go to this dentist. And so no one would then think anything of it,
that a woman on her own is getting into a taxi. On the final occasion, that taxi
driver takes her away from where she was to a location to hand over to people
that were known to us. On the phone call from Raqqa, Khadija's sister is trying
to explain this plan to Taz. But Khadija is terrified. If she's caught trying to
escape, it could be fatal. So now you're going to have to complain about, like
say, pain. And you get on a cab wherever you go, rather than walking, yeah? I
don't understand what you mean there. Just remember what I said to you last
time, just follow my instructions, yeah? OK. How confident are you, like say,
when things are put in place and you have to get on a cab? Is it real? You
shouldn't huddle. OK? Just try and keep it to yourself. It's just that I feel,
well, what if someone says something to someone and it comes out and people try
to follow you about or whatever? I don't want to put someone else's life at
risk, do you understand? It's someone's life. What's that noise? They're
disclosed shots. Oh, they're closing now? Yeah, that was... OK, then. And let me
know as soon, yeah? OK. What I've said to you, OK? How are you feeling? She
sounds terrified. She sounds very terrifying, you know, and she did get very
emotional there as well. Is it hard to hear her so scared? Well, I really feel
helpless, really, thinking, you know, what can I do? It's really hard. I mean,
that's the first time I've heard her voice and she sounds so young. She sounds
like just a little girl, do you know what I mean? Very delicate. She is a baby.
And from all the conversations you've had with her, do you feel that if you were
to ring her today and say there's a plan for you to come home, you need to do
this, that she'd do it? She would do it. Straight away? I think she would do it.
Not long after this conversation, I get a text from the lawyer, Taz. He asks me
to meet him in East London in the middle of the night, because he's just got
news from Raqqa. It's just broken that a young girl was trying to leave Raqqa.
She got, unfortunately, caught and ISIS have beaten her to death and let that
news spread as well. That's obviously a very worrying development for us in
terms of Khadija wanting to get out of Raqqa. But it does also explain why she's
so terrified. Taz has just found out about a 17-year-old girl who was caught
trying to escape ISIS territory. The terror group have beaten her to death. It's
more akin to really people trying to leave a drugs gang in Colombia or
something. It's a message that was being sent that if you try and leave, you
will be brutally killed. Taz says Khadija has also found out about the girl's
fate and is now even more terrified. Khadija knew that there was a lot of risks
in terms of trying to leave. She knew that there were checkpoints in place and
if she was stopped there and she didn't have a very good reason that checked
out, then she would be arrested by ISIS, which was effectively execution. And so
she decided that she would abandon the plan and she would stay where she was.
Khadija decides to stay in Raqqa. Shamima Begum's told me that she felt it was
too dangerous to escape. It seems Khadija came to the same conclusion. She ends
up remarrying to a Dutch Somali jihadist called Tai Muller. He's blind, a big
guy and often pictured carrying a weapon. He appeared in ISIS propaganda. In one
video, he addresses people in Somalia, telling them ISIS is fighting for them,
decapitating Christians who are tormenting them. As he speaks, footage appears
showing prisoners having their heads sawn off with a short knife. It's gruesome.
Khadija moves in with Tai Muller. They live in an apartment building in downtown
Raqqa. It's in a nice neighbourhood not far from the house of the Egyptian ISIS
armourer Abu Kumra. Who Shamima Begum might have lived with. So Khadija ended up
married to a notorious jihadist trapped in the epicentre of the so-called
caliphate. Years after this, Taz and I discuss what happened. We've never really
spoken about how he felt about Khadija's decision to stay with ISIS. How does it
feel to have somebody you've been trying to help turn down that option?
Horrible. It feels horrible. But the options were potential death and potential
death. Those were the options. She's a young woman and she was in the impossible
situation of trying to assess whether staying where she was was more legal.
Whether staying where she was was more lethal or less lethal than trying to
escape. Which of course is lethal. That played on my mind a lot. Because if she
were killed en route following a plan that we had put into place, well how much
of her death is on my shoulders? But yeah, these are the choices that war
presents you. She chose. Taz pauses for a moment, seemingly losing his words. A
cigarette wobbles in his hand and he stares right through me, lost in his
thoughts. Shamima Begum and I have spoken a few times about Khadija. When was
the last time you saw Khadija? I was in my house by myself. My husband was out
of town and her and her husband just came to visit me. And they said, do you
want to stay here in your house by yourself or do you want to come stay with us?
And obviously if I had made that decision I would not be sitting here with you
now. So she just said, do you need anything? Do you want anything? And I was
like, no. And then she left. That night I heard the bomb. I didn't know at that
time how much it would affect me obviously. But the next morning Amira and
Shamima, they came to tell me that Khadija had been killed and that we need to
go to the hospital and identify her body. So we went and saw her body. It was
really hard because it had been bombed really badly. It was in pieces. That's
the lasting memory I will have of her. Are you okay? Yeah. You sure? Yeah. It
was just hard. I mean it was hard to see her body and then we had to go to the
internet cafe and tell her family what happened. That was also hard as well
because, yeah. That was one of the lowest points of my life I guess. I feel like
in a way I have not accepted her death yet. It's just like a constant reminder,
you know, that she could be alive today but she's not. And in a way it may be my
fault. I don't know the word but if I had said, you know, I don't want to go to
ISIS, guys, don't come either. Or if I told the police the truth, maybe she
would still be alive. You know, maybe we would have never gone to Syria. Maybe
they would have never spoken to me again because they would see me as a snitch
but they'd still be alive. And that would be enough for me. So you feel guilty?
Yeah. But they made their own decisions, didn't they? Yeah, they did but I feel
like I could have stopped it. It's just how I feel. Is it hard to carry that
around? It is. And if I ever do go back to the UK, having to face their families
is going to be really hard. This is the first time I've heard Shamima Begum
admit she could have stopped the girls from leaving. It shows she does recognise
there's been a huge cost to some of the choices she made. To think something as
simple as telling a teacher or a family member about their plan to join ISIS
might have stopped all this is a tragedy. Back in 2016, I reported on Khadija's
death and published some of the call between her and her sister. I recorded a
phone call in London with Khadija's sister in an internet cafe. I've heard it
many times. After she died, Amira and Shamima told me the truth about how she
wanted to leave. Even though it was long after when she died, but they told me
the truth and they showed me the video clip of her sister calling her and her
talking. How did it feel to hear that? I mean, it just made me sad to hear her
voice. My mind didn't even comprehend what she was saying and the situation that
she wanted to leave. I just, all I thought about was her voice. It's strange to
think that the recording I made was listened to by Shamima Begum and her friends
in Raqqa and became a way for her to remember Khadija. I've spent time
investigating how and why Khadija died. I located her apartment in Raqqa and
spoke to people who were there on the night of the bomb. I've mapped airstrikes
throughout the city and reviewed declassified documents. It had been reported
that she was killed in an airstrike by Russian forces who were targeting ISIS at
the time. I don't think that's accurate. The night she died, I'm told the
basement of the apartment was being used by ISIS militants. It's possible a
meeting of high profile individuals was taking place there and it looks like the
US led coalition was watching. They likely released a single precision bomb from
an aircraft to target the building. We put this to the US Department of Defense
in October. They told us they were working to provide us with an answer very
soon. But we're still waiting. By August 2016, one of the girls Shamima Begum
travelled with is dead. She says she feels trapped and at one of the lowest
points of her life. But then she tells me her life changes. I found out on my
birthday that I was pregnant so it was a good day. I was really excited. I was
excited because I was excited to tell my husband. And he was really happy too
and it made me happy to see him happy because of something that I did. I kind of
craved his approval and that was one way of getting his approval. But obviously
I was happy for myself. I wasn't just getting pregnant for him. I wanted a child
for myself as well. Do you remember the moment you found out you were going to
be a father? Yeah. Yeah, I remember. He said, hey, husband, I'm pregnant. Yeah.
When I was pregnant with my daughter, maybe seven months, the bombing started to
get really bad. And my husband looked at the situation and he said, Raqqa is
going to fall and I don't want to be here when that happens. The situation
looked very unstable and I didn't want to be there for the fight. But he also
did not want me to be there in my condition because I was pregnant. I felt like
I would not have been able to survive ISIS without him. Even though there were
hard times, I told myself that it's worth it because if I did not have him, I
would lose my mind. So I told her we're going to have to move soon. She says,
okay, we'll move. So we pack our bags and we went to Deir ez-Zor. They leave
Raqqa, that's now increasingly being hit by airstrikes, and move to Deir ez-Zor.
It's about three hours away and sits on the Euphrates River and offers Yago and
Shamima Begum another place to live. It was like a lot of bombed buildings, not
a lot of people, not a lot of life in general, you know. I was at the end of my
pregnancy, you know, I gave birth. I was just by myself, you know, taking care
of my daughter with my husband. Didn't know much. And how did it feel when you
held your child for the first time? It was beautiful. It's like nothing else. It
gives a whole different dimension to your life. This small little baby that's
there. Since the earliest days of their marriage, Yago, a man Shamima Begum
describes as abusive, had wanted her to get pregnant. By the time she was 17,
she'd miscarried twice and was undoubtedly living in a difficult situation.
Regardless of her circumstance, she tells me having a baby gave her a sense of
purpose. What did it feel like to become a mum? The best feeling ever, I cannot
explain it, really. I felt like I had a purpose in life. The first time ever I
felt loved, really. The first time in my life that I felt loved and I felt
needed and wanted. Obviously after I gave birth to my daughter, the bombings
scared me a lot more. They made me realise that I'm not just responsible for
myself, I'm responsible for another human being that completely depends on me,
and I took that very seriously. It was a really big burden on me. It was really
scary because I didn't know anything about being a mum. I barely knew anything
about being an adult, let alone a mum. And then right after I gave birth, I got
pregnant again. And then my son was born as well. I get to enjoy time with my
family. I used to take my daughter to the market every day where I was selling
stuff. It was a nice time, yeah. Shamima Begum now has two young children. A
girl called Saraya and a boy called Gira. For now, she's able to enjoy this
moment in relative safety. But it won't be long before the fighting catches up
with the family. Did you worry about bringing kids into that environment? I
didn't think it was going to end like that. I didn't think it was going to be
that bad. I didn't think it was going to end like that. I didn't think it was
going to be that bad. in a few minutes' time. Why are some kazoo subscription
customers being told to hand back their cars? You and yours will investigate
after the news at midday. We have comedy before that in another episode of
Gloomsbury, coming up in just a moment. You can literally go anywhere at the
snap of your fingers. For 100 years, the BBC has been making groundbreaking
radio drama. Of course I'm a tired woman, but you have to ask yourself what I'm
tired of. The radio plays our voices in the dark. Join me, Michael Simmons-
Roberts, as I explore this great dramatic form. It's just a sheer amount of
possibilities. Continuing our celebration of the centenary of BBC radio drama.
There is scope for so much more to happen on radio. Dramatic Beats, on Radio 4
and BBC Sounds. On Saturday night at 8. How's your sausage, darling? I've seen
more appetising objects lying in the dust in the deserts of Kazakhstan, in the
wake of a camel train. I thought the toast was passable. No, I've had enough.
Henry, please don't spit things out at the table. I should have done the decent
thing and spat it out ten minutes ago. Don't be disgusting. We're not
barbarians. Well, they're certainly going to descend into barbarism if the
Goslings don't sort themselves out and resume normal duties. I'm going to sack
Mrs Gosling and put an advertisement in the Times for a replacement cook. No,
darling. Yes, darling. She's very upset at the moment, darling. They're on the
verge of divorce. Servants shouldn't be allowed to get divorced. They should be
setting an example to the rest of us. If you put an advertisement in the Times,
we'll be deluged with applicants. Who's going to interview them? You? Well, no,
I'd rather... I'd rather thought I would do it. Spend all day talking to 17
different women, one who mutters inaudibly... It's not illegal to mutter
inaudibly. And then one who never stops talking in broad Scots, so I can't
understand a word. Oh, well, you don't seem to have a problem understanding a
Scots accent when you're talking to that Hilda woman. What? Your latest admirer.
Or does she revert to her BBC voice in your intimate moments? Henry, I refuse to
talk about this. This episode with Hilda is over. She's merely a colleague now.
Oh, yes. I will not discuss this at breakfast. We were talking about the trials
of engaging new staff. Mrs Gosling must be forced to forgive her husband. I have
a feeling Mrs Gosling is impervious to forgiveness. Nonsense! She's a
Pentecostalist. I'll have a private word with her. Appeal to her better nature.
Has she got a better nature? Oh, Mrs Gosling. And how are you feeling this
morning? Much better, I hope. I've been in tears since 25 to 7, madam, but I
hope with the help of the Lord Jesus I shall find the strength somehow to carry
on. The post come. Thank you, Mrs Gosling. And there's another thing. I want to
apologise. I lost control of my breakfast this morning. It's just that... I feel
so let down by that Mr Gosling creature, what I should never have married, and
he's been and gone and broke my heart, and I shall never forgive him as long as
I live, so help me God! Never! Never, never! Ah! Good luck with your forgiveness
project, darling. Oh, well, I'll have to give it one more shot. Who's that from?
It's Augustus Dong, of all people. He wants to drop by this morning as he
happens to be in the area. Isn't Augustus Dong rumoured to have an extraordinary
number of children? Yes. I think women must be attracted by his long hair,
straggly beard and arty clothes. Perhaps he wants to have a child with you,
darling. He'd better not try. I can't stand beards. And I want you to get rid of
him with lightning speed, Henry. I simply must take advantage of this cloudy
weather and trim my box. Now, Lidl, you'll never guess what we're going to do
today. Hmm. Something wonderfully clandestine and exciting. Hmm. Do you know, it
says here somebody's seen something in Loch Ness that looks like a giant lizard.
Lionel, will you listen to me? We're going down to Sizzlinghurst today and
taking a surprise present for Vera. Hmm? Will you please put that newspaper
down, Lionel? Oh, very well. What were you saying about going to Sizzlinghurst?
Rarely, Lionel, do you ever listen to me at all. I've got a present for Vera and
it's something quite, quite marvellous. We're going to install it in her garden
secretly as a surprise. Install it? What is it, a statue? No, no, no, something
far more mysterious. It's an aeolian harp. An aeolian harp? One of those
contraptions that make the noise when the wind passes through it. Contraptions,
Lionel? Noise? Your choice of vocabulary is always so prosaic. As the casual
summer breeze caresses its strings, the aeolian harp trembles, it resounds, it
echoes, the music of the spheres. Gosling's going to help smuggle it in and
install it. Why does it all have to be so harsh-harsh? Because I've got to sweep
Vera off her feet with a breathtaking gesture. I must wrest back the initiative
vis-à-vis Hilda, you see. Wrest back what initiative? Oh, Lionel! I used to
regard myself as Vera's closest friend, but now that nauseating Hilda has come
barging in and distracted her. Between you and me, I fear there may be a little
romance going on. No, no, no, Ginny, I'm sure you're quite wrong about that.
You're simply imagining things, as usual. Hilda Mathewson? Hilda, darling, it's
me. Vera, darling, how wonderful to hear your voice. I'm still tormented by the
cruel things I said after that broadcast. Do you forgive me? I've already told
you there's nothing to forgive, and I'm so looking forward to our clandestine
tea today. That's the thing. I'm sorry, Hilda, but I can't come up to London
today. I simply must sort out this servant problem once and for all. I'll come
down and sort it out for you. Nobody dares to disobey me at the BBC. No, no,
darling, you mustn't come down. Henry's here all day, and he's in the most
frightful mood. Just leave it to me. Vera, you're hopeless with staff. They take
advantage of you. Let me be your knight in shining armour. No, no, please,
Hilda, let me deal with it. Oh, somebody's coming. I've got to go. I'll ring you
tomorrow. Honestly, being a dawd can be such hard work. Mrs Gosling? Yes, sir?
I'd like a word with you in confidence. Mrs Gosling, please don't go. I can't
bear the thought of never tasting your muffins again. Oh, can't you find it in
your heart to forgive your husband and stay? I'll never forgive that scoundrel
if I live to be 100. But as to staying, well, there is one thing that might make
me change my mind. What? Well, you know I've always admired you, and I've seen
ladies come and go, your bosom chums, that Mrs Fox, where their hair's in
vapours, and now this BBC lady, Miss Hilda thingamajig of... Whenever I sees
them sucking up to you like, it makes my blood boil slightly, if you don't mind
my saying so, sir. Are you saying...? What are you saying, Mrs Gosling? I want
to be one of your bosom chums. You? Yes, I know I'm beneath you, ever so far
beneath you, and not worthy to kiss the soles of your boots, though I've
polished them often enough, and washed them French brassiers of yours, and
folded up your silk drawers inasmuch as and whereupon I know you intimately to a
certain extent. If you get my drift. I'm not sure I do get your drift, Mrs
Gosling. Well, I'll make myself plain, sir. I'll forgive Mr Gosling and stay on
here as your cook, if I could be permitted once in a blue moon to worship and
adore you, not at close quarters like, but from a respectful distance. Just
perhaps recite the odd poem, or make you a special bosom cake. A bosom cake? To
celebrate being your bosom chum. I could make a cake in the shape of a bosom,
your bosom, if I may be so bold, and decorate it with a couple of cherries. Mrs
Gosling, I'm infinitely obliged for your kind offer, but I need time, time to
reflect, to consider, so I will let you know my thoughts later. Very well, sir.
Or may I call you beloved? I'll have to think about that. Now, my husband and I
have a brief meeting in the library, Mrs Gosling. Yes, Mr Mickleton told me. The
coffee's ready on the stove. Do you want me to bring it in? No, it's all right,
thank you. I'll take the key. And may I just say, if ever I shall get a little
cat in retirement like, I shall name it after you. Thank you. Oh, Lord, she is
one of thy most beautiful creations. Well done, though. I'm burning like a
flame, dear. I'll never be the same, dear. Do you take milk, Mr Donnell? No, no,
thank you. Black. As black as the pupils of your eyes, Miss Sackloff-Vess. Or
indeed her fingernails. Vera's never happier than when she's grubbing about in
the earth. Yes, and in fact, I'm in the middle of something rather crucial in
the garden at the moment, so I shall have to dash off shortly, I'm afraid. I'm
so sorry. Oh, but wait! I was listening to that broadcast you did about modern
marriage, and I have a little proposal for you, something really modern, if you
have the imagination and courage for it. I have very little courage, old boy.
And I have absolutely no imagination, but do please go on. Well, I'm proposing
marriage to you, both of you. I beg your pardon? A pentisocracy. A pente-what? A
pentisocracy, a sort of commune, you know. All possessions shared, complete
sexual freedom, liberty, equality, depravity. Sorry to disappoint you, but I
don't think we're all that orgiastic, are we, darling? Certainly not! Well, if
the commune doesn't appeal to you, how about another child? What? I've got a
spare half hour this afternoon. I could give you one, if Henry has no
objections. Well, I've got an objection. Quite frankly, I find both your
proposals not only absurd, but impertinent. And what's more, I'm sick and tired
of being propositioned. Good day to you. I'm sorry about that, Augustus. We do
respect the idea of free love, of course, but Vera's under a lot of strain at
the moment because of our servant problem. Yes, yes, her spirited nature was
very evident on that programme you did on the wireless. Got to keep women in
their place, man. Call them woman for a start. They like that. Well, I'm not
sure Vera would respond well to being called woman. That's what's wrong with
your marriage. If you want to stop her running off with other women, you must
start being masterful. Other women? Common knowledge, old boy. And another
thing, give her heaps of children. I've got 57, so I know what I'm talking
about. Keeps them busy. Frankly, the only woman here who needs to be brought to
heel is our cook, Mrs Gosling. We're trying to get her to forgive her husband.
I'll perform that office with pleasure, man. What? Really? Yes, yes. Never miss
the opportunity to bring a woman to heel. Nothing would give me more pleasure.
But first I'd like to wander about in that glorious garden of yours, if I may. I
need to do some stetches of acanthus leaves. Of course. Be my guest. You might
come across Mrs Gosling in the garden, actually. She's a short, stout woman with
bright red hair. Right then. No need to show me out. Good day to you. Good day.
Enjoy the garden. A month in France with Hilda? Out of the question, woman.
Right, now, Lionel, where's Vera at the moment? Over by the south cottage,
trimming her box. Well, go and keep an eye on her and make sure she doesn't
wander this way. If I must. Now, Gosling, I want the aeolian harp to be heard
from the gazebo but not seen. Where would be the best place to put it? Right
about here, madam. The gazebo's just the other side of this hedge. Oh, thank
you. That's perfect. And this will catch the passing breeze? It's quite a drafty
spot this can be out here. Not much wind today, though. I can blow into your
harp if you like. No, no, Gosling, that will not be necessary. Thank you for
your help. Lionel? Oh, Henry. What are you doing here? Oh, Ginny wanted to give
Vera a surprise present, a peace offering or something. Have they quarrelled?
Not as such. I think Ginny's a bit jealous of that Hilda woman. Oh, no, I don't
want to hear any more. Tear-stained letters, phone slammed down, moping and
sulking. It's like living in a girls' boarding school sometimes. Women do seem
to be at the mercy of their emotions. I don't think I've ever had a strong
emotion, apart from anxiety. Actually, Lionel, I've got a little project you can
help me with. Oh? What? Augustus Dong is visiting. He's somewhere around. You
might meet him. He looks faintly biblical. Anyway, he's a frightful bounder and
all that, but he gave me an idea about how to bring Vera to heel, and I'd rather
want to try it out. Oh, well, good luck with it. No, I mean I want to try it out
now. Rehearse it, I mean, with you being Vera. Oh, oh, lovely. Could I wear that
green silk frog of hers? I've always admired it. No, no, no, Lionel, I don't
want a great theatrical charade. Just pretend you're Vera for a moment, will
you? And you're going to the south of France with, um, an imaginary woman. Let's
call her Elspeth. Oh, oh, all right then, Henry. Um, um, uh... Henry, dear, I
hope you don't mind, but I'm thinking of going down to Montaigne with Elspeth.
No. Listen to me, woman. You're not setting foot outside this house. Castle,
Henry, dear, surely. Don't interrupt me, woman. You're not setting foot outside
this castle until you've come to your senses. I won't have it, I tell you. Oh,
Henry, you're so masterful all of a sudden. Perhaps I should go to the south of
France with you instead. No, Vera would never react like that. She'd go cold and
steely and stalk out. Perhaps I need more practice. It's out of the question,
woman. Was that convincing? Mm, nearly. Take that, and that, and that, and that.
Vera, dear, how are you? Ginny! Oh, God, what the hell are you doing here? We
just happened to be passing. I thought I'd drop by and see how you're getting on
with your horrid servant problem. Oh, it's just ghastly beyond words. Mrs
Gosling has placed me in an impossible position, and then Augustus Donne turned
up out of the blue and made some indecent suggestions. I get so sick of people.
Oh, dear. What you need is to be soothed, charmed, perhaps enraptured. No! What
I need is to be left alone to clip my box. I'm sorry, but I'm in such a temper.
I'm not fit for company at the moment. Why don't you come back tomorrow? Just
come and sit with me in the gazebo for a peaceful moment, Vera. Relax. Listen to
the music of the spheres. No, I don't want to listen to the music of the bally
spheres. I've got to clip my box. Why have you got to clip your box? Because
it's cloudy. One must clip one's box when it's cloudy. There's no need to shout.
I'm not shouting. I'm sorry, but I just told you I'm feeling unsociable and I
want to be left alone. Louis! Hilda! Oh, dab and blast! Who's that? It's your
precious Hilda. I don't expect you to be feeling unsociable now. What? Hilda?
But I told her... Good afternoon, Vera. Good afternoon, Jenny. Good afternoon,
Hilda, although it's not a very good afternoon, really. Poor Vera's wrestling
with the servant problem. She's not feeling very sociable, you know. Oh, don't
you worry about that. I'll get your servants to jump to it. Now, where's Mrs
Gosling? In the kitchen, I presume? No, no, Hilda. Let me deal with this. Vera
doesn't need more confrontation, Hilda. She needs to be taken out of herself.
What Vera needs, Jenny, is somebody to lay down the law for her. I am that
person. Stop it, both of you. How dare you presume to know what I want? Please,
will you both go away and leave me to deal with my own affairs? Well, Vera, that
is quite a hurtful thing to say. Of course, I know I must be very irritated.
Yes, you are irritating. I know you're a literary genius, but you're extremely
irritating. Please, Hilda, Jenny is not irritating. Yes, she is. I may be
irritating, but at least I don't say pardon and toilet. I may say pardon and
toilet, but at least I'm head of talks at the BBC. At least I'm not Scottish.
I'm not staying here to be insulted. I'll away to your kitchen, Vera, to give
Mrs Gosling a piece of my mind. Are you sure you can spare some? Oh, please,
both of you. And don't try to stop me. Ha, ha! She's going off in the wrong
direction, of course. Never mind. I don't want her to speak to Mrs Gosling
anyway. Well, I'm glad she's gone. Now, Vera, for one last time, will you come
and sit in the gazebo? No, Jenny, for one last time, I want to be left alone.
I'm sorry. I'll telephone you tomorrow and come up to town to see you. Ah!
You'll find five minutes for me before running off for an afternoon with Hilda.
Oh, stop it! I've been foolish all along. It was very foolish of me to come down
today. I leave you to your precious solitude. But, Jenny, sure... Goodbye! Down,
down, down! You left me sad and lonely Why did you leave me lonely? Vera! Vera!
Vera, what is going on? What do you mean? I just met Hilda in the North Walk.
She said you'd asked her to come and sort out the Gosling problem. That's an
absolute lie. I told her not to come, but she rode roughshod over me. Oh, spare
me the sordid details. Listen to me, woman. I don't want to see her here ever
again. Do you hear? How dare you speak to me like that, Henry! I've had enough
of your womanising. I tell you, woman! Don't you ever call me woman again.
What's come over you? You know being a woman is the bane of my life. And as for
Hilda, I wish she would just go away. Sure, sure. May I have a word? Oh, God,
whatever next? Don't leave me alone with her for a split second. Why not? Excuse
me, sir, but I made some cherries for something I'm making. There's a cherry
tree by the gazebo. Making something delicious, I hope, Mrs Gosling? Just a
cake, madam. Ah, a peace offering for Mr Gosling, perhaps. No, madam. I wouldn't
waste it on that swine. Your wife knows who it's for, don't you, sir? What on
earth was all that about? Viffy, I've no idea what she's talking about. I think
I'll go and get my waistcoat. The wind's getting up. What are you doing, woman?
I'm just picking some cherries. Oh, my stars and garters, it's... it's... it's
you! I mean, thou! You know who I am? Yes, yes! From the paintings. And I know
you, woman. Well, of course you do. Thou knowest everything. Mrs Gosling, you
must forgive your husband. Of course, of course. Anything for you, my lord. And,
sir... Do you have children, woman? No, sir. I mean, lord. Never been blessed
that way. Most a pity. You shall bear a child, Mrs Gosling. I shall give you
one. Oh, my stars! Oh, oh, I feel fine. Oh! Oh! Oh! Oh! Oh! Oh! Gertrude.
Gertrude. Gertrude. Gertrude. Gertrude. You all right? Oh! Where's he gone?
You've fainted. Take it easy. Put your head between my knees. No, no, Mr
Gosling. You've got that wrong. It should be put my head between my knees. But I
forgive you. You forgive me? I forgive you. What? For everything? Everything.
You all right, Gert? What's come over you? I've seen a vision. Didn't you see
him? He was here just now. He told me to forgive you. My life will never be the
same. I am truly blessed. Great news. Let's get back to the kitchen and have a
nice cup of tea, eh? Oh, there's just one thing, Mr Gosling. What? I just feel I
ought to warn you that there's a fair chance I may be with child. What? Whose?
Jesus's. Jesus? This child will be the Messiah. The second coming. If that's all
right with you. Oh, quite all right. I forgive you. We can call him Percy, after
Percy Fender, the surreal rounder. Ideas for you. Make everything easy. Three
sugars, Mr Gosling. Yes, please, Gert. And being as we're back together now, may
I join you tonight in the matrimonial bed? You may, Mr Gosling, but I don't want
you taking no liberties until I've run it past Jesus. Fine, fine. I never used
to have much time for Jesus, but now I reckons I've got a lot to thank him for.
Mrs Gosling, I want a word with you. Do you indeed, Miss Mathewson? Yes, I do.
You've got to put your nose to the grindstone and get back to providing your
employers with the service they expect. You must abandon this ridiculous row
with your husband at once. What row? I can assure you that Mr Gosling and I are
enjoying perfectly amicable relations. In fact, we're even going... I'll deal
with this, Mr Gosling. So I would respectfully ask you to leave my kitchen and
make no further disrespectful remarks in future about subjects about what you
know nothing and what are none of your business. Impertinence! I shall tell Miss
Sackcloth this what you've just said. Well, I can tell you what she said about
you just now in the garden. I heard her talking to her husband. She said, as for
that Hilda, I wish she would just go away. What? You may think she's your bosom
chum, but you're sadly mistaken. It's not you, what's-her-soul mate, it's me.
You? How dare you? She loves my muffins, she doubts on my dumplings, and she
adores my sponge fingers. She told me so this morning, so put that in your pot
and smoke it. And another thing... Let me deal with this, Mr Gosling. So, in
view of your being unwelcome here, I would respectfully suggest that you sling
your own... How dare you speak to me like that! I am the head of talks at the
BBC. I don't care if you're the head of John the Baptist! Now get out of my
kitchen and never knock on my door again! You... You're driving me crazy. What a
horrendous day. Ginny and Hilda bickering over you like a couple of terriers
fighting over a tennis ball. Well, they've gone now, so please calm down,
darling. And what on earth's that infernal racket? I don't know. A bird-scarer,
perhaps? You know Gosling's always raging war on the crows. Where is the damn
thing? It's over here. Ginny's contraption. Pass me the chairs, darling. Here
you are. Blasted racket! Well done, darling. I can hear the owls now. Peace at
last. And here's Mrs Gosling with the coffee. Don't be surprised if she behaves
rather oddly. I think she's going through the change. Oh, God. I'll deal with
it. Thank you, Mrs Gosling. You've had a long day. There's no need to stay up.
We'll bring the tray in. Good night. I'd just like to say that I've took the
liberty of bringing you that cake what I mentioned earlier. Good heavens, it
looks like it... well, it's faintly obscene. May I beg leave to recite a short
poem? No, Mrs Gosling, please don't. It's only short. Let's give the Lord thanks
for Miss Setcloth-Vest. Of all the English ladies, she's simply the best. She
grows lovely roses and chrysanthemums, and I'm proud to say she regards me as
one of her bosom chums. Mrs Gosling, we appreciate your loyalty. We applaud your
cuisine. But we have been driven to distraction by your recent matrimonial
paroxysms. Beg pardon? Don't say pardon, Mrs Gosling. Say sorry. Sorry? There
must be no more hours, there must be no more sulks, and there must be no more
poems or cakes resembling parts of the body. Do you hear? Otherwise, I shall
have to give you notice. Notice? Yes. What, the sack? Yes. And I'd never see you
no more, nor the mistress, neither? No. Oh, my stars! What a terrible thought!
I'll be quite as a mouse from now on, madam. I'll be as good as gold. I won't
say a word. Good. I just must say something else first, though. Leave it till
tomorrow, Mrs Gosling. No, sir, sorry, but it's only right I tell you this now.
I've got reason to suspect that I am with child. With child? Yes. And it's going
to be the Messiah, the second coming. If he's a boy, we're going to call him
Percy, and if he's a girl, we're going to call him Vera, after you, sir. Thank
you. I'll be off, then. Mr Gosling and I are going to celebrate with a cup of
cocoa. Good night. Good night. Good night. Well done, Henry. You were quite
masterful with her. Masterful, eh? Was I? So, somehow, I managed this at last.
She certainly came to heel. Well, apart from the religious delusions, she is a
competent cook. And now, if you'll be so kind, darling, please cut me a slice of
that bosom cake. Would you like a piece with a cherry on? No, Vera. You have
been listening to Gloomsbury by Sue Lim. Vera Sackclough's vest was played by
Miriam Margulies, Ginny Fox and Mrs Gosling by Alison Steadman, Henry Mickleton,
Jonathan Coy, Hilda Mathewson, Morwenna Banks, Lionel Fox and Gosling, Nigel
Planer, Augustus Dong, John Sessions, the producer was Jamie Ricks. Gloomsbury
is a Little Brother production for BBC Radio 4. Let's turn our thoughts now to
Moneybox Live, coming up at 3. Here's Adam Shaw. There have been calls to limit
the tax-free lump sum people can take from their pensions and to increase the
state pension age. Internet searches for pension questions have hit record
highs. Add to that a cost-of-living crisis, unstable markets and the end of the
tax year fast approaching, it all means a lot of people are looking at their
finances and investments. So today we're looking at pensions, investment
portfolios, savings and any of the financial questions which may have been
bothering you. If you've a question or a concern, you can email us at moneybox
at bbc.co.uk or you can tweet us at Moneybox.