TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 have walked out of the ashes of the Islamic State group, she's discovered in a
detention camp, where she gives an interview that will change her life. BBC News
at 11 o'clock. The former Health Secretary Matt Hancock has rejected claims he
ignored advice from the Chief Medical Officer Sir Chris Whitty to test all
residents entering care homes during the early stages of the Covid pandemic. The
Telegraph newspaper has obtained WhatsApp messages from Mr Hancock, which it
claims show he decided only to test people being discharged from hospitals. Mr
Hancock says the messages from April 2020 have been doctored to create a full
story, and that they fail to mention a meeting he attended where he was told it
wasn't possible to test everyone. Fraser Nelson, the editor of The Spectator and
a columnist for the Telegraph, says the messages don't reference a meeting. In
that exchange, there was plenty of time for him to make that point, but he
didn't, and to me that's what jumps out. The way that these decisions are taken
without really anybody quoting or citing evidence, it's very done, or it had to
be those days, in a very quick, almost cavalier fashion. And there are several
more examples like this. The FBI has said it believes Covid-19 most likely
originated in a Chinese government-controlled lab in Wuhan. Beijing has rejected
the conclusion as political manipulation. The World Health Organization has
previously described the leak theory as extremely unlikely. At least 36 people
have been killed in what's thought to be one of Greece's worst train crashes.
The collision happened between a passenger service and a freight train last
night, near the central city of Larissa. The government has declared three days
of national mourning, as rescuers continue to search through the wreckage. More
than 200 police officers are continuing to search for a missing baby, a day
after the child's parents were arrested on suspicion of gross negligence
manslaughter. Constance Martin and Mark Gordon were detained in Brighton after a
nationwide manhunt. The French football legend, Juste Fontaine, who holds the
record for scoring the most goals in a single World Cup, has died. He was 89.
Fontaine netted 13 times in six games in the 1958 finals in Sweden. BBC News. On
Radio 4. Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. The Lord's Prayer
is shared by Christians around the world. On earth as it is in heaven. In this
year's Lent Talks, six people reflect on the words of this prayer. As we forgive
those who trespass against us. Sharing stories of forgiveness, fatherhood and
finding heaven on earth. For thine is the kingdom, Lent Talks. On Radio 4 and
BBC Sounds. Begins this evening at 8.45. Amen. Well now on Radio 4 we continue
the Shamima Begum story presented by Josh Baker. And this episode includes some
graphic descriptions of violence. Can we go back to 2019? Why you went to Syria,
what you were doing. I was going to report on the Battle of Baghouz, which was
the last slither, the last territorial entity of the Caliphate, which was where
the Caliphate went down. I just remember driving for hours through this
featureless desert, along these kind of ribbon roads, which just go on and on
and on. Skies smeared with burning oil. The wreckage in areas that had been
fought over already. And then Baghouz itself ended up getting fought over for
the best part of kind of two months. This is Anthony. He's been a war
correspondent for nearly 30 years. We worked together at the Times of London
when I first started in journalism. In February 2019, he was in Syria, as the
so-called Caliphate was coming to an end. The terror group was surrounded in a
small town called Baghouz. A lot of people just gathered in a very small area,
really fighting it out until the last minute. These were the remnants of the
Caliphate? These were remnants of the Caliphate, yeah. Hardcore fighters,
disaffected fighters and their families. Thousands of them. The self-styled
Caliphate was once around the size of Britain, but now it's confined to a square
mile within the town of Baghouz. There were some drone strikes going in on
Islamic State positions, sniper fire coming back. You know, the battle would
kind of ebb and flow. Pounded by artillery, the last vestiges of the first
modern-day Caliphate are crumbling, the supposed utopia becoming a mass of death
and rubble. And then there was the day-to-day grind and bump and pop on the
battlefield, and sometimes that would mount up if there was a particular assault
or push somewhere. And then increasingly it would pick up as air strikes, the
momentum of the battle as a whole picked up. As Antony looks over the
battlefield of Baghouz, what he doesn't know is somewhere amongst the fighting
are Shamima Begum and her husband Yago. Let me explain how they got there. To do
that, I need to go back to 2017. Shamima Begum, Yago and their two children are
living in a small town on the Euphrates River, not far from Baghouz. It's
relatively safe. Can I see the picture again? Yeah. And she's shown me pictures
from around this time. There's one of her daughter, Saraya, who's 18 months old
with long, dark hair. I was so happy the day I saw... And has a big, toothy grin
as she eats pomegranate seeds. My husband was making her laugh and I just
quickly took the picture. And there's another picture of your... Son. Then
there's her son, Jarah, six months old, lying on a mattress and poking his
tongue out. For a while, you know, life was good, there weren't bombings, there
was everything to buy, like milk and diapers and food and stuff, there was no
problem. There was nothing more beautiful to me than my daughter. It wasn't
easy, but still, you know, there was the family element and I did get to enjoy,
you know. They'd left Raqqa, the city Shamima Begum once believed to be a
utopia, because they feared it would be destroyed. And they were right. The
start of the battle for Raqqa. This is a war of annihilation, says the United
States. There is devastation everywhere, in the Syrian capital of the Islamic
militants, the battle to oust the extremists has come at a very high cost. The
men of the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces are winning, but the entire city
has become a no-man's land. They are giving it their all, but the growing worry
is what happens afterwards. At that time, I still didn't know about how bad it
was, the last days of ISIS in Raqqa, you know, the siege and the families, you
know, leaving injured. A lot had died. I didn't even know if my friends had come
out or not. So that was scary, not knowing. ISIS has lost its capital. Their
supposed state is collapsing. Tens of thousands of the group's members flee the
city and flood into the area where Shamima Begum is living, including her
friends Amira, who she'd left London with, and Sharmina, who she says convinced
her to join ISIS. The friends end up in a guesthouse known as a madaffa that's
nearby. The place that they lived in was a very big house. It was just full of
women, maybe 200 women, literally, not even exaggerating, like there were women,
like, sleeping in the corridor and stuff, you know, and it was, yeah, it was
really bad. And there were a lot of diseases going around with the children. And
then the fighting started and the bombing started and we just had to keep moving
from place to place, depending on where the fighting was, and it was just hard
to just pick up your life and your kids and just keep moving. And I was also
pregnant again at that time. The battle to destroy ISIS pushes the group's
followers into a smaller and smaller area, and closer to the town of Baghouz. At
this point, Shamima Begum is expecting her third child. The situation started to
get really hard, you know, like there wasn't anything in the shops to buy
anymore, like milk and diapers for kids and food, and everything became more
expensive. There was nothing. Some people would sell meat. I don't have any
money. Where am I going to find the money to buy meat? People were slaughtering
donkeys, eating donkeys. There was like proper starvation going on. Women going
through the streets begging, sir, do you have something to eat? I have kids, I
have no food in my house. What am I going to say? I don't have food for myself.
I cannot give you anything. Did you worry about bringing kids into that
environment? I didn't think it was going to end like that. I didn't think it was
going to be that bad. What happened to the children? We ran out of money. There
was nothing in the market anyways. When you make wheat, when you make flour,
there's a waste product, like the shells that they give to, I think, cows and
stuff. That's what we were making like a sort of soup of, I guess. And there was
some green stuff growing outside, plant that used to boil a little bit. That's
what we were eating for maybe months on end. So first of all, my son, he passed
away because she didn't have breast milk and he couldn't eat. Afterwards, my
daughter, she got really, really skinny and at one point she couldn't stand up
by herself anymore. At one point I came home and I heard that she had stopped
breathing and they brought her to the hospital. She was my world. She was my
reason for living through everything, through ISIS and through my husband's
abuse. She just kept me going. I was living for her. I wasn't living for anyone
else but her. So when she died, it was like my entire world just collapsed
around me. It's hard to go from being a mother who has to wake up and do all
these things for her kids to waking up and not having anyone who needs you. The
only reason I didn't kill myself was obviously because I was pregnant with my
second son. But if I had not been pregnant, I would have taken my life. Tell me
about when you ended up in Bagoos. How did that come to happen? I mean, after a
lot of moving, moving, moving, fighting, bombing, moving, moving, giving birth,
it was just a lot of moving. What's it like being in Bagoos with all of that
coming towards you, all of that fighting, all of that? So hard, because at that
point I knew and everyone else knew that there was nowhere else to run. This was
the last place, you know. There's no plan B. We either die here or we get out,
you know, and people were trying to leave the entire time. ISIS are completely
surrounded. This is the end of their so-called caliphate. In a desperate bid to
stop people leaving, the terror group spread rumours that the Kurdish and Arab
forces who are fighting them are torturing anyone they capture. Like, at the
end, I just said to my husband, I would rather be like being tortured and raped
than die for these people. And he was like, OK. A dark, apocalyptic hellscape.
Corpses rotting in the pallid spring sun. The stench is everywhere. Blown on the
desert winds. The last remaining IS fighters among makeshift tents and burnt-out
cars. Their defeat is inevitable. What we're witnessing are the final moments of
the Islamic State. Tell me about the day you left ISIS territory. How did that
come about? My son, Mardor, had obviously died. I was really depressed. I didn't
want to get up anymore. I didn't want to get up and run from the bombs and the
fighting. I just wanted to, like, just lie down and die. But my husband kept
pushing me to, like, get up and go. From sunrise to sunset, we were walking. And
I was heavily pregnant at that time, so that was hard as well. And I was
severely malnourished as well. We walked out together with a group of Syrians
and Iraqis. Maybe it was about 10km. We didn't know where we were walking. We
were just following the person at the front until we finally, like, met these
soldiers. We spent a night in the desert. After this, we got separated. I got
taken to prison. My wife got taken to the camps, and that's the last I've heard
of her. The story of the women and children Thousands of men, women and children
are emerging from the desert, clutching the few possessions they have from their
lives in the so-called caliphate. Journalists are filming as long lines of
people walk out wrapped in blankets, bits of carpet, and anything they can find
to shield themselves from the sun in the day and the cold at night. The last
ISIS families bedraggled and covered in dust are fleeing the fighting. This is
an exodus on a massive scale. 50,000 people who no one wants to take
responsibility for. Anthony, the journalist who's been reporting on the battle
for Baghouz, is now watching all of these people stream out. He wants to follow
them. A lot of foreign fighters' families, they were surrendering, they were put
in a couple of holding areas to see if they had, you know, suicide vests on them
or weapons. And they're being bussed up to our whole camp, probably about 30,000
women and children. That's a lot of people in a very short space of time. I say,
well, let's go and have a look at what's going on in our whole. I want to speak
to some British women who presumably have come out of Baghouz. I didn't know
exactly. So you move east along another long, thin desert road and suddenly the
camp sort of merges out of the mess of sand and mud and a bit of marshland
through a lot of barbed wire, and it's huge. Lots of wire, lots of tents, pretty
ragged tents. It looks really disorganised right from the word go. There's kind
of pretty thin kids running around through the kind of mud and dust. All these
women, all still dressed in black, in full niqab, and many of these niqabs quite
dirty or quite frayed by that point. These thin, quite unnourished women who
have been through it in a camp at the edge of a desert. Nobody really knows what
to do with all the people who've been with ISIS, so women and children are being
put into refugee camps. They're run by mainly Kurdish fighters who've been key
to defeating the group. After arriving, the women and children are being taken
to a camp called Al-Hol. Anthony says he makes his way to the main office. I
just remember sitting in the administration block and chasing this conversation
on for a long time. I'd really like to speak to some of the British women who
might have turned up here from Baghouz. It's like, we haven't got any British
women here from Baghouz. I can give you Chinese women's speech, I can give you
Canadian women's speech, American women, you can speak to French women, but I
haven't got any British women here. That went on for quite a long time, like
even maybe a couple of hours. However, finally, he said, OK, I'll go into the
area, the section for new arrivals. He then reappears with two women who are
fully covered and says, yeah, I've got a couple of people to speak to you.
Anthony says their faces are covered by the caps, so he can't see who they are.
He speaks to one of the women for a few minutes. Then he turns to the other. And
she says something back to me in a London accent, and I'm, wait, hang on, wait,
you're from London? And she's like, yeah, I'm a sister from London, I'm a
Bethnal Green girl. She said, I'm a Bethnal Green girl. I'm a Bethnal Green
girl. I'm a sister from London, I'm a Bethnal Green girl. It's almost exactly
four years to the day since Shamima Begum left Bethnal Green in East London, and
Anthony has just found her. She's being held in a camp alongside thousands of
other ISIS members. She's nine months pregnant and about to give an interview
that will change her life. I'm Josh Baker. This is the Shamima Begum story.
Episode 8, No Plan B. I remember starting forward in my seat and staring at her.
First thought that went through my head was, right, OK, I need to take control
of this environment now. This is important. This is Shamima Begum. This is one
of the missing Bethnal Green girls. I said quite simply, immediately, OK, would
you mind stepping outside with me? And it became worse. She was pregnant. Even
though it was February, I thought, well, don't put her in the sun. And it was
quite easy between us speaking. It was immediately like, OK, you are straight
out of Islamic State, but you're also a London girl and we could kind of have
this, like, bipolar conversation. You're one of the Bethnal Green girls, right?
Yes, I'm one of the Bethnal Green girls. In a noisy, dusty yard by the camp's
administration office, Antony records an interview with Shamima Begum. This is
the 19-year-old Shamima Begum who's just spent the last four years with the
Islamic State group. What was that like? Was that an experience which fulfilled
your aspirations? Yeah, it actually did. It was like a normal life. The life
that they show on the propaganda videos, you know, it's a normal life. Every now
and then there are bombs and stuff. Then I asked her had she seen any executions
because I wanted to ascertain, you know, her level of complicity or support or
her understanding or feelings around Islamic State atrocities. Did you ever see
executions? No, no, I never. No, but I saw the headed heads in the bins. In the
bins? Yeah. It was really grim. What was that like when you first saw that?
These are the heads of captives? Yeah. I was... It didn't faze me at all. Then
when she said she wasn't phased by it, people seemed to get very hooked on that.
Why do people get so hooked on that? Because they think that if you say you're
not phased by the sight of a severed head, that it indicates somehow that you
are brutalised and potentially radicalised. Maybe she wasn't that phased by it.
You find often young people in war are keen to advocate their own strength or
resilience and they make a kind of boast or brag about their reaction to
something horrific. It is not necessarily an indication of their true feelings
or an indication of how brutalised they are. Being unphased doesn't interest me
so much. What interests me far more is the logic around how that guy had had his
head cut off. I said, who was he, a captive or what? She said, yeah, he was a
captive, he was seized on the battlefield. So I'm like, well, didn't it bother
you that he ended up beheaded? And she said, no, just think what he would have
done to a Muslim woman. So there's an immediate radicalised logic. There's an
immediate judgement. He is someone who would have done something bad to a Muslim
woman. It's fine that he got his head cut off. She is speaking like that
because, as I would exactly expect her to speak, she's been with Islamic State
for four years and that's how you speak, that's how you think. For Anthony, the
woman he's interviewing is very much speaking within the ideology of ISIS. And
that's interesting because years later when I ask her about the severed head, I
get a very different response. You did mention in an interview in the past that
you'd seen a decapitated head. Can you tell me about that? I didn't see the
blood on the street. I hadn't noticed it, but apparently they had done the
execution in the street and then put the heads in the trash bags and then just
left them under the staircase. My husband wanted to freak me out, I guess,
because he knew that I'd never seen something like this. So he showed it to me
and I just, you know, I was shocked. But I just didn't know what to say. I mean,
I had seen beheading videos, but it's not the same as seeing it in real life. I
still can remember the smell. It was very strong and, you know, I was holding my
door in my arms at the same time, you know, and thinking, like, I need to
protect her from this. But there's nothing I can do. It just made me sink into
myself more and more. From not phased to shocked and sinking into herself. And
there are other differences. She's repeatedly told me she regretted joining
ISIS. But when Antony asks her... On the one hand, you don't regret coming to be
part of the Caliphate. No, I don't regret it. But on the other hand... When I
came and I saw that there was underground oppression and all this happening, it
came as a shock to me, like, this is actually happening. Do you think this is
the end of the Caliphate? Yeah, I really do. I don't have my hopes. And there's
so much oppression and corruption going on that I don't really think they
deserve victory. She says she doesn't regret coming to ISIS, but also that they
don't deserve victory. At this point, Shamima Begum has just emerged from the
ashes of the so-called Caliphate. She's spent her formative years living with a
terror group in a war zone. Antony is probably the first person she's had a
proper conversation with who doesn't think like an ISIS member. She seems
conflicted, unsure if she should denounce ISIS or try to defend parts of it. She
does both things in a way. It's like she's caught between two ideologies. As I
listen to this interview, I hear someone who's not yet free of ISIS's way of
thinking. As for why she gives me one answer and Antony another, perhaps she's
trying to deceive me to clean up her image. Or maybe she's changed since 2019
and genuinely thinks differently. Why do you think she walked out of Bagoos? She
wanted to save her baby's life more than her own. Some women wouldn't have
wanted to come back to save the life of their unborn child. They would have
said, you know, it's the will of God, I live in the land of Caliphate, if Allah
wants the life of my child, then he'll take it. You don't automatically assume
that a woman's going to say, I need to go home because I want the NHS to save
the life of my unborn child. I have to think about my baby as well. After my two
kids died, I just, now I'm really overprotective of this baby. I'm scared that
this baby's going to get sick in this camp. That's why I really want to get back
to Britain, because I know it will be taken care of. Quite health-wise, at
least. When is your baby due? Officially in nine months. I should be giving
birth any day now. At the end, I felt... I kind of felt, you're all right,
you're a mess now. I kind of felt, you're all right, you're a messed up London
teen. You're in a jam, you're in a real jam. You're in a really serious
situation. And then what happens? Just before Shamima left, she gave me a
number, which was the number of her sister in London, and asked me if I could
call her and say that she was alive. As a journalist, I thought, maybe call her
tomorrow, because if I call her now, she can tweet, or call someone up from the
Daily Mail or The Guardian and say, I've just had word that my sister is alive
and in our whole camp, or whatever. But there was a human side as well, that...
I'd been a hostage in Syria, by an Islamist group who had connections to the
Islamic State. Antony was reporting from northern Syria in 2014, when he was
kidnapped, beaten and shot. He says this experience played a big part in his
decision to prioritise calling Shamima Begum's sister over protecting the
exclusivity of his story. I'm curious about the parallels of what you felt
compelled, why that led to you calling. At one point, I had been rescued by
another rebel group, so they'd taken me off some aid post in Syria. And while
I'm there, a doctor comes up and he says, you need to tell someone that you're
alive and that you're here. This phone has got two minutes worth of credits and
two bars of signal. And I remember thinking at the time, I got one shot at this,
I'd die-call the editor and discuss quickly what's happened, or... Sorry, I
can't talk about it. That's OK. Don't need to. I'm cool. I'm all right. No, I
can't talk about it. I remember calling Amy when I got blown up. It was a very
weird situation. Erm... Suddenly it catches you out, huh? No, I'm just getting
my breath back. I can talk... I just need to tell you, I can talk about it. I'm
going to talk about it. Are you sure? Yeah, sure. My logic was my wife probably
realises I'm missing, put her out of her agony as soon as possible, tell her
you're alive, end the pain for her. So that's what I did. The memory of that
kind of played out in my mind, and, you know, there's, like, some family in
great pain over Shamima's whereabouts, whether she's still alive or whatever. So
don't frig around, worrying about losing control of the information, you know.
Remember how it was for you. Do the right thing. So I called her up and said,
I've just seen your sister, she's alive. What was her reaction on the other end?
There was a long silence on the other end, and I could hear her. I could hear
her weeping. That was, um, yeah, it was a pretty emotional phone call. Anthony
gets back to his hotel, opens his computer and files his story. It makes the
front page of The Times. Shamima Begum is pictured nine months pregnant, dressed
in black but with her face uncovered and looking straight into the camera. Above
her, the headline reads, Bring Me Home. Straight to The Times, Bring Me Home,
the extraordinary story of Shamima Begum. As a journalist, you get excited about
these stories in one way. She's back from the dead. Begum was discovered in a
refugee camp. Along with nearly 40,000 others, she fled... In her own words, she
has no regrets...about running away to Syria to join the Islamic State group.
But now, nine months pregnant, she wants to return home.....to have her third
child. The question is what should happen to her now? The Shamima Begum story
explodes back into the media. Journalists are now racing to get their interview
with her. She's held in a detention camp, about to give birth and desperate to
come home. But what she says to the media is going to have a big impact on
whether that will happen. Her fate is soon to be decided. The Shamima Begum
story is the second in the investigative series I'm Not A Monster. It's
presented by Josh Baker, who produced it with Sara Ubidat and Joe Kent. And if
you want to hear more, Josh will be talking about this episode with Adrian
Childs over on Radio 5 Live in just a few minutes' time. However, if you do
that, you're going to miss the latest update from Sizzling Hurst, where things
are really starting to hot up. Mrs Gosling is on the point of divorce, and the
poet WB Yikes has decided that Ginny is to be his muse. An all-star cast bring
the Bloomsbury set to comic life. Today's episode is called The Celtic Cringe,
and you can hear it in just a moment. Chat GPT is the artificial intelligence
technology that seems to be everywhere. It's an extraordinary phenomena. It's
burst on the scene. I'm Laura Lewington, and I'm going to see what Chat GPT can
do. This is going to happen. We need to learn how to use this technology
effectively. Can it write good essays, suggest holidays, or simply change our
daily lives? All of the ethical questions that concern us when we think about
using AI, they're right at the centre in the use of GPT. And can it even make a
radio programme? Find out in a documentary by Chat GPT, next Monday evening at 8
o'clock on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. MUSIC Bloomsbury, a rhapsody about Bohemians
by Sue Lim. Episode 5, The Celtic Cringe. It is a rainy morning in Tavistock
Square, and the eminent novelist Ginny Fox is wrestling with an existential
crisis, while her husband Lionel is wrestling with a kipper. I'm sorry to have
to inform you, Lionel, that this is a day of cataclysmic significance. And
there'll be worse to come. I'm very worried about the rise of fascism in Europe.
And this kipper's inedible. Oh, stop introducing non sequiturs and listen to me.
I've decided to end my friendship with Vera. Goodness! Really? She never even
bothered to acknowledge that Aeolian harp I gave her, let alone thank me for it.
Well, you know, in Ceylon, giving a gift is considered an honour in itself and
thanks are regarded as unnecessary. In the East, you know. Well, in East Kent,
thanks are not regarded as unnecessary. Vera's so ungrateful, and she makes me
feel old and grey and threadbare. I feel old and grey too. But she is ten years
younger than you and a great beauty. There's no need to rub it in. Oh, yes, she
is, all roses and pearls and strides over the weald with their huge dogs loping
through the long grass while I scramble along panting in her wake like an
asthmatic tortoise. So are we going down to Sizzlinghurst today? Yes. She's
invited me down. We had a little row last time and I expect she wants to
apologise. Oh, dear. It sounds upsetting. I'll have to take my marmoset. Looking
after a small helpless creature helps me to relax. I really think it was very
irresponsible of the Rothschilds going off travelling and asking us to look
after a monkey, of all things. But she gives me such joy. That's it, Lionel.
You've stumbled upon it. What? Joy. Or the lack of it. When I first became
acquainted with Vera, there was a sharing of joy. But she's preoccupied with
other people now. I merely hover in the purliews of her pleasure, a dusty ghost.
It has to end. I'm going to finish with her today. I'm burning like a flame,
dear. I'll never be the same, dear. Here's your kidneys. Thank you, Mrs Gosling.
And I'd just like to say that I don't think I'm going to give birth to the
Messiah after all. Oh. Sorry to disappoint you, Miss Sackcloth-Vest. That's
fine. I hadn't absolutely set my heart on it. Well, if that's all, I'll go and
pick some goose gulks. I'm going to make a foal of them. Please do. Oh, quite a
relief about not having to nurture the Messiah. Yes, indeed. Think of the school
fees. Now, I absolutely must not be disturbed today, Vera. I've got to
concentrate on my work. Of course. I wish I'd never agreed to write this damned
book. Have I got to remind you yet again that it's a great honour to be asked to
write the biography of the King? Yes, but I have to pussyfoot around subjects
all the time to avoid giving offence. I'd done over 2,000 words at the start,
but I've had to cut so much I'm down to 555. The wretched book is shrinking.
Well, we won't disturb you. We? I've invited Ginny down. I was rather beastly to
her last time, and I want to apologise, darling. I'm beginning to think you
can't manage a single day without an outbreak of female hysteria, darling. What,
what? I could go for a year without anything of the kind. And your superior
attitude is extremely irritating, darling. You know very well that any brief
flirtations I may indulge in are conducted well away from home, darling. You can
be such a prig, Henry. Now, please tell Ginny and Lionel that I must stay
undisturbed in the library. And tell Lionel to walk the dogs. He prefers animals
to human company anyway. Pass the hot sauce, darling. My kidneys are getting
cold. I think I'll have one last cup of tea. Oh, who on earth could that be?
Nobody calls at the crack of dawn. It is twenty to ten, Ginny. Well, precisely.
I'm still in my dressing gown. You go. All right. Good morning. Good morning. My
name is W.B. Yikes. I'm a writer of sorts, and I wondered if it might be at all
possible for me to see Mrs Ginny Fox. Mr Yikes! Oh, well, of course. Do come in.
Unfortunately, my wife has a chill on her bladder and requires the lavatory.
Rather urgently. It's up the stairs and first on the right. Thank you so much.
I'm so sorry. My wife is twenty-five years younger than me. Look at the way she
flies upstairs, like a hare on the mountain. My wife's only two years younger
than me. Never mind. There are other ways of rejuvenating yourself. Do come and
meet my wife. She will be thrilled. Ginny! Lionel! For heaven's sake, what are
you dreaming of? I'm still in my dressing gown. Let me introduce myself without
further ado, madam. I am William Butler Yikes. The poet. I know Mr Yikes is a
poet, Lionel, you idiot. Oh, good heavens, good heavens. Oh, please excuse me
for receiving you in my dressing gown. Oh, I'm sorry. That sounds a bit odd.
This is so embarrassing. I'll go and get dressed. Excuse me one moment. Sorry
about that. Think nothing of it. People are often overcome when they're
introduced to me. Are you visiting London for a particular reason? Well, you
see, my wife, that dear girlish little thing, so unexpected, but she has
supernatural powers. What? Clairvoyance. She can go into a trance and talk to
the dead. But how does this relate to us? She had a vision in a dream. She saw
this house, her spirit guide, an Egyptian gentleman, informed her that we would
find something precious here. Well, someone once told us we've got rather an
important teapot. Not precious in the material sense. Something precious in the
metaphysical sense. I see. Thank you so much for the use of your lavatory, which
is splendid, by the way. I'm Georgie Yikes. How do you do, Mrs Yikes? Oh, please
call me Georgie. Have you been married long? In a sense, not long. In another,
forever. She tells me we've been married before, in a previous life. She's such
a tender-hearted little thing. Can't bear any kind of argument. Really?
Marvellous. And do you find her company rejuvenating? I do, I do. Although I
have medical assistance. With the help of my wife and these pills, I feel 20
again. Won't you try one? I don't know. Bertrand Russell takes them, you know.
Russell? Does he really? I knew him at Cambridge. All right, then. Here you are.
Thank you. You will feel years younger, I promise. It takes different people in
different ways, and the effects are almost immediate. Oh, sorry, I talk so long.
I got trapped in my liberty bodice. Georgie, meet Mummy. Oh, sorry, I mean
Jenny. Would you like to see my marmoset, Georgie? I'd love to. We can take her
out in the garden. Won't be a tick, will he? No. Whilst your husband is showing
my wife his marmoset, I must open my heart to you, Mrs Fox. Come on, then,
Georgie. How spiffing. Won't be a tick, will he? No. Whilst your husband is
showing my wife his marmoset, I must open my heart to you, Mrs Fox. Or may I
call you Uturpie? You what? Uturpie, the muse of lyric poetry and flutes.
Goodness, nobody's ever called me the muse of flutes before. Forgive me, but I
have found my precious thing. I beg your pardon? You, dear lady, are my precious
thing. You are my muse. A muse! How exciting! Will I have to do anything? You
have simply to be, and let me gaze upon your beauty. Beauty? Oh, surely not. Oh,
your dark beauty, your hooded eyes, threaded with the golden glimmers of
twilight. Can we go to a park? A park? I want to watch you as you drift along
between flowers and hedges. I tell you what, come down to Kent with me. Vera's
got marvellous flowers and hedges. Who? My friend Vera Sackclough-Fest. I'm
going down to see her today, anyway. I'm not a fan of her, though of course I
don't read her books. Of course not, they're popular. Yes, popular, but I
suppose the poor woman can't help it. She writes them in her tar, you know. A
tower! A tower! By God! Is that significant? I live in a tower when in Ireland,
with a rushing river below. Take me to see your friend, you turpy. You're trying
to make me crazy. I hope Mr Yaggs won't get lost in the garden, but he did
insist on wandering about on his own for a bit. I've got a feeling he's the sort
of man who would get lost in a sentry box. Oh, but one expects that of an Irish
lyric poet, and he is so eloquent. Do you know, before he called this morning,
Lionel and I were both in such a negative state of mind, and look at Lionel now,
romping like a child. I don't think I've heard him laugh since 1927. You don't
think his head has been turned a bit by Mrs Yaggs? She's very young and
vivacious. Oh, no, nothing like that. It's just her way. Her husband said some
very flattering things to me. Ridiculous to feel gratified, but still. What did
he say? He said I was beautiful. Yes, beautiful, ridiculous, really. Not
ridiculous at all. I've been telling you you're beautiful for ages. Yes, but
listen, Vera, I know this may sound a little louche and Celtic, but he wants me
to be his muse. His muse? What does that involve? There's no actual salary, but
I think the idea is that he will gaze at me from time to time and be inspired by
my so-called beauty. Doesn't his wife mind? Oh, no, no, Vera. It's not an erotic
thing. Are you sure? No, it's cerebral. In fact, she was the one who decided
they must come and see us. Well, it's good to see you looking so positive, my
dear. I'm delighted for you. I can't believe it now. It seems so preposterous,
but this morning I was in such a negative mood. I'd convinced myself that our
relationship was bad for me. And I was going to end our friendship. Really? You
are a silly goose. Yes, yes, so absurd in retrospect. My confidence is sky high.
Now I'm the muse of the best lyric poet writing in the English language. Oh,
she's coming. How do you like our garden, Mr Yikes? Oh, it's tremendous. It's a
triumph. I'm quite transported. I always think it's the best garden in England.
But I have one plea, Miss Sackclough-Bess. Yes? Do let me ascend your tower. I'm
afraid nobody is allowed up my tower. Do you know, Mr Yikes, I've been Vera's
closest friend for years, and I've only been up her tower once. Ah, but I have a
tower too, on the coolest estate in Ireland. If you show me yours, I will show
you mine. I'm afraid I must decline your kind offer, alas. Your courteous
stubbornness is most alluring. Isn't it just? Poor Vera. Everything she does is
alluring. My dear Miss Sackclough-Bess, would it be rude to say I see you as
Artemis, goddess of the hunt and wild animals? I hate seeing animals being
killed. I'm terribly tender-hearted, really. Yes, yes, lustrous eyes, strong
sinewy legs, and those rather dashing boots of yours. An imperious manner, but
secretly a tender heart. You are my muse, Miss Sackclough-Bess. What? I thought
you said I was your muse. You are also my muse, Mrs Fox. Yours are the hours of
darkness. Vera is the muse of light. Honoured though I am to be thought of as
your muse of light, I'm afraid my diary is far full at the moment. Besides, I
thought you had a muse already. Yes, it's me. I just told you. No, Jenny, I was
thinking of that Irish lady, Mrs Gone. Mrs Gone is gone. Gone? She wouldn't have
me five times over, and then her daughter wouldn't have me either. That must
have been going. When you told me I was your muse, I thought it was a unique
compliment. I didn't realise there was a whole gang of us. Well, how would it be
if you were my muse for Monday to Thursday, and Vera could do the weekends?
What? A part-time muse? Ridiculous! I'm afraid I'm always rather tied up at
weekends. My husband, you know. Ah, your husband. I must meet him. I want to
talk to him about fascism. I'm afraid he's closeted in his library at the
moment. He's fiercely stuck with his biography of the king and mustn't be
disturbed. In that case, I shall take a walk around your tower and imagine you
within. What a strange man. I'm very upset, Vera. Why? This business about your
being his muse. I can't help that. People are always adopting me, pursuing me,
identifying me as one thing or another. I think it might be because I'm rather
tall. Oh, don't be ridiculous. It's because you have charisma, beauty,
confidence. I, unfortunately, have none. You've captivated, yikes. You've stolen
him. Don't be ridiculous. I don't want to be his silly old muse anyway. Don't
say that. He's our most important living poet. He must be humoured and helped
and inspired. You're so off-hand sometimes. That's absolute rot. Vera! Vera! Oh,
God. Quick, stop arguing. We've disturbed him. I will not stop arguing. Our
relationship is over and I never want to see you again. Vera, Jenny, please. I'm
trying to write in the library and all I can hear is your shouting. I am not
shouting. We're not shouting. We're simply having an animated discussion about
lyric poetry in ancient Greece. Oh, those bloody dogs. I'm going to stop this
racket once and for all. The dogs love the marmoset. And she loves the dogs. Oh,
you can train her to ride a big dog like a jockey. And I'm going to get lots of
marmosets and race them up and down Tavistock Square. Lionel! Lionel, please.
Henry, hello. This is my new best friend, Georgie. How do you do? Hello, Henry.
Charmed, I'm sure, but I'm afraid I really must have peace and quiet. I'm trying
to write in the library. Could you take the dogs down to the meadow? What's that
thing on your shoulder? It's my marmoset. Are you all right, Lionel? You're
rather red in the face. Never better. Georgie's husband gave me one of his pills
and I feel 20 years younger. Really? Lionel! Here he comes. Oh, dear, I'm afraid
I really can't... Good afternoon, sir. William Butler Yikes. Oh, good heavens.
What an honour. I'm sorry, I didn't realise. You are Mr. Mickleton, of course.
My compliments, sir. Your garden is a cornucopia of earthly delights. Thank you,
and your poetry is work of lyric genius. Quiet! Lionel, please, take the dogs
away. Of course. Come on, Georgie. I'm coming, Lionel. So, Mr. Yikes, I hope
somebody's looking after you. I'm so sorry I'm not at liberty at the moment. I'm
horribly stuck with a paragraph, and if I don't start to make progress today, I
think I'll go mad. Ah, writer's block. I have the answer, my friend. The answer?
It's the most marvellous thing. I just take one of these pills every day.
Before, I was sunk in age and lethargy. Now, lyric poetry streams from me like a
waterfall from a high rock, shake it with a swig of brandy. How long before it
takes effect? Oh, a matter of minutes. And the marvellous thing, apart from the
effect on the writing, is the restoration of masculinity. Masculinity? Good
heavens. Well, I do feel a strange tingling. That's it. It's starting to work.
Well, I leave you to it. Mustn't disturb you any longer. No, no, don't go. We've
hardly met. Let's talk about art and life and politics. Ah, yes, for example,
fascism. What a lovely thing it is to be sure. Well, the boots and long leather
coats are very stylish, but I'm not quite sure about the underlying philosophy.
Have you ever worn a long leather coat? I've worn long coats, but not of
leather. My coats are made of woolen cloth and my scarves of silk. Silk? Oh,
yes, yes. I can see you striding about Dublin in a long coat, a flying scarf,
some kind of wide-brimmed hat. Your monocle gives you an air of loose erudition,
which is very attractive. Back to your desk, Megalton. Your pen awaits you. I
won't disturb you any longer. Wait! You have such a wonderful voice. I would
like to recite one of your marvellous poems to me, and... and... I don't mean
anything untoward by this, but... please, may I hold your hand? You left me sad
and lonely Why did you leave me lonely? Oh, come on, Jimmy, there's no need for
melodrama. This is not melodrama. It's fact. Our friendship is over. Don't you
dare flounce off in a huff. I'm not flouncing! You are. I'm not! Oh, my
goodness. Are you two arguing? Please don't. I'm sorry, but your husband told me
I was his muse, and then he changed his mind and appointed Vera. He didn't
appoint me. You're being silly, Jimmy. Look, please don't argue just because of
us. Life's too short. I can't bear it when people are cross. Where is Lionel?
Oh, watching the dogs over by the stables. Very well. I'll be off. A great
pleasure to have met you, Georgie. Oh, Jimmy, no, please don't go while you're
angry with Vera. Oh, I've just had the most marvellous idea. We could have a
séance. A séance? I can't possibly participate in a séance. I'm an atheist.
Don't be such a spoiled sport, Jimmy. Of course we can have a séance. And people
in spirit are particularly wanting to communicate with you, Jimmy. With me? We
could go up to my study, draw the curtains and light candles. What? And a séance
in your tub? Why not? We won't be disturbed up there. Do come, Jimmy. Just to
bring a necessary dash of scepticism to proceedings. Oh, very well. Now, we must
all sit around the table and hold hands. I'm not holding hands with Vera. Don't
be so petty. Sit here, Jimmy, between me and Willy. That's better. The
atmosphere is powerful in here, the antiquity. It's Elizabethan, you know. Stop
boasting, Vera. Oh, shh. Now I must have quiet. Mmm. She'll be in a trance
directly. How extraordinary. Is anybody there? Oh, I feel a presence. An older
man. A bearded man. Mmm. Jimmy! Oh, God! Father, is it you? Of course it's me,
Jimmy. You are my favourite child. I reach out to you across the vale.
Delightful to talk to you, Father, but may I speak to Mother? Don't pester her.
She's busy. Jimmy, I've heard you being very impertinent and intolerant towards
your friend. That was bad behaviour, child. I'm sorry, Father. Jimmy, you must
forgive. Forgive somebody whose name starts with a V. Oh, that's me, Vera.
Forgive! Oh, he's gone. Well, thank God for that. He was always so intimidating.
Can you get Mother on the line instead? Hush, hush now, Mrs Fox. It's not a
telephone. Oh, there's somebody here for you, Willy. For me? Mmm. Good
afternoon, one and all. Who speaks to us through the vale? Identify yourself,
spirit. I'm Emily. Emily Ellis. No, wait a moment. Emily Pell. Oh, no, dammit,
blast. Sorry. We don't use our ethnic names on to the side. Now, what was Miss
Her name? Started with a B. Brown. Brown. McClough. Beachy. O'Brien. Oh, that
would be her, surely. Oh, wait, wait, me dog's misbehaving. Woof, woof, woof. Go
on, Keeper, go on. Good boy, good boy. Keeper? Wasn't that Emily Bronte's dog?
Bronte, Emily Bronte. That was it. That were my name on earth. You are the
spirit of Emily Bronte? That's right. And I've got a message for you, William. I
am to be your muse. Ah, my muse. Wait a minute. Vera and I are supposed to be
your muses. I really don't mind stepping aside if Emily Bronte wants the job.
Yes, yes, I was misled earlier. I went stumbling down the wrong path. But Emily
Bronte, the tall, dark, thrilling, wild, tempestuous creature, my muse. How can
you dismiss us just like that? Oh, well, because being a muse is too heavy a
burden for any earthbound creature, Appen. I will be with you always, William,
nestling on your shoulder like Lionel's marmoset. How do you know about Lionel's
marmoset? We see all, we hear all on the other side. You'll have to excuse me
now. I've got to take Keeper for a float over the moors. The moors. I should
have known. I should have thought. Oh, the vibrations are getting weaker,
weaker. Oh, hello again, everybody. Did any spirit speak through me? Was it a
success? Get your coat, George. We're going to Yorkshire. You must excuse us,
ladies. I must away to the parsonage at Hayworth. Come along, George. Goodbye.
It's been such fun. Lovely to meet you, Vera, Ginny. And never forget,
friendship is such a precious thing. Oh, could you blow that candle out, dear?
It's giving me a headache. Yes. Oh, it needs some fresh air. I'll open the
window. What a rude man. Just a genius, dear. They're a law unto themselves,
that you should know. We? Of course. You're a genius, a beautiful one. I'm sorry
I was cross. Think nothing of it. And I'm sorry I exposed you to this ridiculous
charade. A seance, indeed. I quite enjoyed it. George is a sweet girl. Let's
just go and round up the men. DOG BARKS Lionel! Lionel! Henry! Your dogs are
going to be the cleanest dogs in all the world when I finish with them. The hose
doesn't work, so I've filled up 17 buckets of water. Are you all right, Lionel?
Yeah, I'm fine. Yikes! Just gave me one of his rejuvenating pills and I feel
like a child again. It's lovely. Would you like a gobstopper? I bought one at
Waterloo. Thank you. He gave me one of his pills too and it's turned me upside
down. You know, I've never realised before how good-looking you are. Oh, surely
not. I'm ugly and gauche. No. When I look at you now, with your sleeves rolled
up and your shirt all wet and your lovely little marmoset on your shoulder, I
think there's the man of my dreams. No, I don't think I'm the man of anybody's
dreams. Oh, yes, you are. Dear Lionel, there's no easy way of saying this. I
simply adore you. Oh, crikey. I want to kiss you. You'll have to catch me first,
Henry. Lionel! Lionel! Come here! I want you! I need you! I long for you! Henry!
Lionel! What on earth's going on? I'm so sorry, darling. Yikes gave me a pill
and it made me come over queer. And me, we were playing kiss tag. Such fun! For
heaven's sake, Lionel! Pull yourself together! I know. Get some buckets of
water, Ginny. Oh, yes! One, two, three. My book! I must get back to my book! Oh,
no. I've started to worry about the rise of fascism again. We seem to have the
old Henry and Lionel back. Good. It's worked. It usually works with dogs. Well,
you chaps get dried off and we'll see you back in the library for tea and cake.
My tears for you. Make everything easy. I'm sorry I had to throw that bucket of
water over you this afternoon, darling. That's quite all right, darling. I
deserved it. I behaved disgracefully. I shall never again lecture you on
inappropriate lasciviousness. I even asked Yikes if I could hold his hand. He
recoiled in disgust and stalked off. Oh, never mind that. So, how did you get on
with your book in the end? Dismally. I had to cut heaps more. I seem to be
writing absolute piffle. This morning I had 555 words and now I'm down to 399.
Oh, dear. I do sympathise, darling, but don't give up. What's the answer,
though? Bribe someone to ghostwrite it? Take to drink? Flee to South America? I
don't suppose you fancy a suicide pact, do you, Vera? Would tomorrow afternoon
be convenient? Certainly not. But I know what you need, Henry. It's just dawned
on me. Oh, yes? It's blindingly simple, really, darling. What you need is a
muse. Oh! You have been listening to Gloomsbury by Sue Lynn. Vera Sackclough's
Vest was played by Miriam Margulies. Ginny Fox and Mrs Gosling by Alison
Stedman. Henry Mickleton, Jonathan Coy. Georgie Yikes, Morwenna Banks. Lionel
Fox, Nigel Planer. WB Yikes, John Sessions. The producer was Jamie Ricks.
Gloomsbury is a Little Brother production for BBC Radio 4. The Midday News is
next on FM, while on Longwave you can hear the headlines and the shipping
forecast, and then afterwards it's you and yours. Arnold Clark is one of
Britain's largest car dealers. Last Christmas it was hit by a cyber attack.
Customers are only now finding out that data, including bank and passport
details, have been offered to criminals on the dark web. One of the stories you
can hear on You and Yours, which is at 4 minutes past 12. Now, here's Felicity
Hanna. If you're over 50 and out of work, then you are in the spotlight just
now, with the government hoping you could help fill record levels of vacancies.
Today on Moneybox Live, we're talking about returning to work after 50, the
finances and the practicalities. So get in touch. Maybe you're over 50,
unemployed, and you'd like to tell us why. Maybe you're in your 50s and you've
got no plans to retire for another 20 years. Or maybe you have a question for
our experts. Email moneybox at bbc dot co dot uk and please include a phone
number to get in touch.