TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's 1 o'clock GMT. Hello and Namaste. I'm Devina Gupta and this is Business
Matters on the BBC World Service. We are live in two different parts of the
world. On the show today, after the dueling speeches from the US and Russian
presidents over the Ukraine conflict, the question still remains, when will it
all end? For millions of Ukrainian refugees who were forced to flee their home
last year, this means struggling every day to rebuild their lives and businesses
in foreign lands. Could you imagine just to leave your house, to leave your
business, to leave your friends? When I say that, even almost one year past, I
just feel all this fear inside. We talk about it more in Business Matters after
the latest news. BBC News, I'm John Shea. President Biden has stressed that
support for Ukraine from the US and allies will not waver in a speech in Poland
delivered ahead of the first anniversary of Russia's full-scale invasion.
Addressing the Russian people, Mr Biden said that the West had not plotted to
attack their country as Mr Putin had asserted earlier. The United States and the
nations of Europe do not seek to control or destroy Russia. The West was not
plotting to attack Russia, as Putin said today. And millions of Russian citizens
who only want to live in peace with their neighbors are not the enemy. This war
is never a necessity. It's a tragedy. President Putin chose this war. Every day
the war continues is his choice. The NATO chief, Jens Stoltenberg, has accused
President Putin of making the world more dangerous after he announced that
Russia would suspend its participation in its only remaining nuclear arms
control agreement with Washington, the New START Treaty. The Russian Foreign
Ministry later said that Moscow was not opposed to resuming participation if US
policy towards Moscow changed. China's top diplomat Wang Yi is in Moscow for
talks with Beijing's strategic ally. He told the Russian Security Council
secretary Nikolai Patrushev that relations between the two countries remained as
hard as a rock. On Tuesday, the NATO secretary general Jens Stoltenberg echoed
US concerns that China could supply Russia with weapons for its war against
Ukraine. Nicholas Rocha reports. From the start of Russia's so-called Special
Military Operation one year ago, China has refused to condemn Moscow's invasion
of Ukraine, although it has claimed it is impartial in the conflict. This week,
Wang Yi said China supported peace and negotiations and would put forward its
own position on a political settlement of the crisis. It's not clear what Mr
Wang will say in Moscow, but the EU and Washington have warned Beijing against
providing military assistance to Russia's war effort in Ukraine. A New York
court has found Mexico's former security chief guilty of taking bribes in return
for allowing safe passage for drugs. Prosecutors said Hernaro Garcia Luna was
secretly taking millions of dollars from the country's biggest crime group, the
Sinaloa drug cartel. Nada Tafik is in Washington. He was once the highest
ranking law enforcement official in Mexico. But what we heard through this
trial, and it has to be said, it was mainly through the testimony of cartel
members who have been convicted of their own drug crimes. We heard how he
essentially allowed the Sinaloa cartel to become a global cocaine empire by
passing on to them sensitive law enforcement investigations at one point, even
giving them federal police officer uniforms and escorts. World news from the
BBC. Iran has added 36 EU and British individuals, organizations and companies
to its sanctions list. They have accused them of supporting terrorism and of
interfering in its domestic affairs, including fermenting violence. The action
comes a day after the EU imposed further asset freezes and visa bans on Iran's
education and culture ministers, among others, for the suppression of nationwide
protests. A court in New York says victims of the 9-11 attacks in 2001 by Al-
Qaeda militants are not entitled to Afghan central bank funds frozen in the
United States. Lawyers for the victims say they will appeal. More details from
Peter Bowes. At the time of the attacks, the ruling Taliban allowed Al-Qaeda to
operate from Afghanistan. They were removed from power by a US-led military
coalition late in 2001, but retook control of the country two years ago. Judge
George Daniels, sitting in Manhattan, said if he allowed the funds which are
frozen in the US to be used, it would mean recognising that the Taliban are now
the country's legitimate government. That, he said, was something that the Biden
administration did not do and a conclusion that US courts lacked the power to
reach. The US authorities have ordered a train operator to pay the entire cost
of cleaning up contamination after one of its freight trains carrying hundreds
of tonnes of chemicals derailed in the state of Ohio earlier this month. The
head of the Environmental Protection Agency, Michael Regan, said Norfolk
Southern would bear the cost for the trauma it inflicted on the town of East
Palestine. The European Food and Safety Agency has made recommendations to
improve the lives of hundreds of millions of laying hens and broiler chickens.
Scientists want to stop the use of cages to raise and house the birds, as well
as ending feed restrictions and mutilation practices. The recommendations also
include revised guidelines on access to the outside. BBC News. Hello and
Namaste. I'm Divina Gupta and you're with Business Matters on the BBC World
Service. It's a show where we connect with two guests from different countries
and opposite sides of the world usually to talk about business stories that are
shaping your world. So thank you for your company at this hour. It's almost 100
GMT where I am in the UK in Salford and with me in the gallery are Hannah, Alex,
Lewis and Paul. So do drop in a hi to us and tell us what you would like us to
talk about at world.business at bbc.co.uk. We love to hear from you so please do
write in. And here's what's coming up. We are live with our guests in Columbia
and Hong Kong and on the programme today we are asking, should tech companies be
held liable for harmful content promoted by their algorithms? Now this debate
has made it all the way up to the US top court. So we will be talking about it
and. We've seen our happiness go up significantly and we've seen our fatigue
come down through the trial. So we can prove that our team are happier, less
tired and are making more money. Work from home, flexi working, hybrid working,
that's all been done and dusted. But is it time for offices now to opt for four
days a week? We will talk about this. So let's check with our guests. We have
Sergio Guzman who's joining us from Columbia where he runs his own risk analysis
company, advising local and international companies looking to invest in
Columbia and the region. Sergio, hello, how are you? Davina, good evening. It's
a pleasure to be back. Thank you so much. Thank you. Four days a week. Is it for
you and your company or not? I don't think so. I think we do four days from the
office, one day from home. And I think for now that's that's an awful though. My
staff keep insisting on wanting more flexibility and spending more time at home.
But for now, I think we're good the way we are. But cutting back to four days a
week alone, I think is a stretch for us. Four plus one for you. You're a tough
boss, Sergio. Let's get Rebecca Chung, Wilkins Senior Asia Correspondent at
Bloomberg, joining us from Hong Kong. Rebecca, would you mind four days a week
or there is no days a week when you are a journalist? It's seven days a week to
be fair. No, I think I enjoy a lot of flexibility and work from home. But it's
hard to imagine businesses in Hong Kong really finding the prospect of four days
a week very palatable. I think we tend to tend to think of it as something that
happens in kind of distant European capitals where siestas are common and so on.
Well, I can tell you talking about the story just makes me wonder at my job
sometimes. We journalists. Well, always on the call. But anyway, let's move on
to the cover story. It's the headline that everyone's tracking. And it's also
been on the news channels across the world because it's been a day of speech
duels between Russia and the US over the conflict in Ukraine, which is now
nearing one year. First, the Russian president Vladimir Putin in his address to
the parliament raced against the West, blaming it for provoking the war, saying
the US and its allies sought limitless power. The Western elite doesn't conceal
their goal, is to inflict a strategic defeat in Russia. What does it mean for
us? It means to finish us forever. They want to grow a local conflict into
global opposition. It's the way we understand it. And accordingly, we will
respond to that because in that case, it's a matter of our very existence. Well,
Putin also said he was suspending Russia's participation in a major arms control
agreement with the US, although a later update from the foreign ministry there
said this may be reversible. But in Warsaw in Poland, the US President Joe Biden
addressed a cheering crowd just a few hours after that speech. And his message
was clear that President Putin chose this war. Democracy was too strong. Instead
of an easy victory, he perceived and predicted Putin left with burnout tanks and
Russia's forces in delay and disarray. He thought he'd get the finalization of
NATO. And he got the NATOization of Finland and Sweden. He thought NATO would
fracture and divide. Instead, NATO is more united and more unified than ever.
Well, President Biden is trying to rally more support for the war in Ukraine and
the America. The US has also promised more support for Ukraine. Just yesterday,
President Biden, when he was visiting Kiev, said the US would give about half a
billion dollar in aid more to Ukraine. But, Sergey, this week it's almost a year
to Russia's invasion. And I've been trying to find out how it's being viewed
across the world as well. How is it being viewed in Latin America? Well, I think
Latin America is trying to take a both sides approach to the conflict. And I
think it's a rather weak and cowardly position. They know that they do not want
to favor Russia, but they also don't openly want to criticize Russia. There's
many governments around Latin America, Brazil, for example, and Argentina that
have good relations with Moscow. Even Brazil is part of the BRICS, Russia,
Brazil, China, and India coalition. And they want to keep that sort of two way
approach to this relationship without necessarily committing arms, resources, or
anything to support Ukraine. In fact, German Chancellor, Olaf Schulz, and the US
President, Joe Biden, recently asked many Latin American countries if they could
donate some of their old Russian hardware for the cause in Ukraine. And the
answer was a unanimous no. Even from President Gustavo Petro, he's been taking a
both sides approach. We condemn broadly invasions of foreign sovereign states,
but he never goes as far as to calling what Russia is doing in Ukraine genocide
or trying to be more stern on Putin. Rebecca, just as Sergey said that other
countries as well that are trying to play this balancing act, but one country
that has been playing a key role is also China. And they have not directly
condemned Russia so far. In fact, Wang Yi, the top diplomat, is in Russia. And
there are concerns over how much China could get involved and what will be the
consequences. Yes, indeed. We did have that quite striking image that, you know,
as we had this sort of dramatic surprise trip from Joe Biden to Kiev, China's
top diplomat, Wang Yi, touched down and arrived in Moscow, really a symbol of
the sort of divisions that we have seen emerge. I mean, it's also been a year
since Xi Jinping declared this, quote unquote, no limit friendship with Vladimir
Putin, which has of course made many in European capitals and Washington
uncomfortable. Blinken, the US Secretary of State Blinken has also said that the
US has intelligence that China may be considering sending weapons to Russia
without providing any sort of evidence as to that. And we have seen China now
taking somewhat of a shift in its stance. It has moved to try and create a
little bit of distance with Russia, you know, has emphasized that it is an ally
of Russia and also tried to paint itself as this sort of potential broker of
peace, a neutral mediator. And Xi Jinping is said to be planning some kind of
peace proposal that may actually be presented to the UN. So, you know, whether
or not that shift is credible, I think it's difficult to see that winning over
those in Europe and the US, but they are targeting, you know, as Sergio says,
countries in Latin America where there may be somewhat of a more natural
alliance as well to see if there can be kind of any more global support for this
slightly reshaped role that is now trying to play in this conflict. Well, it's
interesting because just a few hours ago, China's foreign minister, Xin Gang,
has said that China is deeply concerned about war spiraling out of control, and
it has appeared to hit back at US for shifting blame to China. So a lot of
geopolitical development there, and we will be tracking all of it here on the
BBC. But the actual humanitarian cost of this war, let's talk about that. Which
actually is the millions of Ukrainians who've been forced to flee from their
homes. An estimated 1.5 million Ukrainian refugees have arrived in the
neighboring country Poland since the war began. That's also the country where
the US President Joe Biden addressed the crowd. And the question a lot of people
are asking, for how long can Poland afford to support Ukrainian refugees?
Earlier, I spoke with Alexia Patak, who's a senior journalist based in Warsaw,
Poland, and has been following the story. Poland already suffered labor
shortages even before the war. So additional employees, additional workers that
came after the Folski invasion didn't impact really the labor costs. That is not
only spending on Ukrainian refugees in allowances and financial aid. We have to
also take into the consideration that Ukrainian employees also contribute to
Polish economy by paying taxes. It is estimated that they have already paid over
$2 billion in income taxes. And as well, Polish citizens also spent $2 billion
out of their own pockets on help to Ukrainians, and this was also something that
was taxed. So Polish government is not only spending on Ukraine. They are also
earning out of it. Obviously, there is a hope that many of them would be able to
go back to their country sooner, and this war would come to an end. But for now,
do you see more people crossing the border and coming towards Poland as the war
continues? There are several thousand people coming to Poland every day, but we
can't really say if these are new people. Because quite often they come and go.
I've talked to several refugees that live in Poland currently, but from time to
time they as women, because they are allowed to go back and come back to Poland
again. Sometimes they go to Ukraine to take care of some errands that they have.
For example, they go back to sell a car that stayed in Ukraine, and they don't
want to pay taxes or insurance on it anymore. So they decide to go back and sell
the car. Or sometimes they go back to visit the family or to bring more things
back to Poland. So looking at the data from the border guard, it's really
impossible to judge which part of people coming into Poland from Ukraine are new
refugees. That was Elizia Patać, a journalist based in Poland. Now looking
deeper into the lives of some of these refugees who have been forced to leave
the region since the war began because of the Russian aggression, is the BBC's
Alex Bell. He's with us in the studio. Alex, thanks for joining us at this hour.
Tell us what you've discovered while you were talking to people who have left
Ukraine in the past one year. Thanks Davina. So we've been preparing a special
series of programmes for our Business Series, the sister programme to this one,
Business Daily, this week looking at the wide-ranging economic impact of the
Ukraine war, 12 months after Russia invaded. As part of that, I've been speaking
to a number of refugees with unique stories who've ended up in different parts
of the world, but they are all united by a shared resilience, really, a shared
willing to restart after the enormous challenges this war has thrown at them. So
many of the people I spoke to were small business owners before the war. They
were trying to either maintain what was left of their businesses in Ukraine from
afar or altogether starting something entirely new. Vladimir and Regina
Razimovskaya are one of those couples who are trying to maintain their business
in Ukraine. They owned a successful plant nursery in Donetsk, which they had to
flee after it was taken over by pro-Russian separatists in 2014. And then they
had to leave their new home once again in Ukraine after Russian troops invaded
last February. It was a nightmare for them getting out. They're now happy in
Western Australia, and that's where I spoke to them. In 2022, we have to leave
everything. When I say everything, it means the kitchen stuff. We just have one
suitcase with some kids' things to take with us. We sat in a car and we went to
the border. And that was terrifying because if you looked back, you would
probably never see this again. Could you imagine just to leave your house, to
leave your business, to leave your friends? Well, when I say that, even one
year, almost one year past, I just feel all this fear inside. You're not sure
what's going to happen with you and with your kids. It sounds like in many ways
you had no choice but to leave. How did you go about starting again? We have our
kids and we need to go forward. And Australia has been really helpful and
supporting. And of course, that gives you a deep gratitude to the people and
that gives you strength and that gives you energy and belief that you could
start all over again. Well in spite of everything that you've been through, you
and Vladimir still run that business selling plants in Ukraine. Is it still
functioning? Oh, so if we talk about the nursery which was in Donetsk,
unfortunately, it had been completely destroyed and damaged. So all greenhouses,
the office buildings, the fields are ruined and damaged. So no trees alive, just
not because of the bombing but because of no water supply for almost a year. But
the business, I mean in terms of revenues, is just one tenth of what we used to
have. And this is just enough to keep our team afloat, just to pay them salaries
because they have their families. And so I could hardly say that there is any
business left in life and we are very pessimistic about this year because you
see that plant is such a stuff that people could buy when they believe in
future. When you trust that there is future for you, you buy plants. And the
people in Ukraine now are so exhausted, so tired by the war, they're losing
their trust, the belief. I don't think that buying plants is on top of their
minds. So there are a lot of things happening that really tells us that this
year, at least, will be really hard for us in terms of running a business. That
was Regina Razumovskaya speaking to me for the BBC's Business Daily. Happy to be
settled and away from the horrors of war in Australia but still striving and
indeed struggling to keep that business alive in Ukraine. Well, Alex, thanks for
sharing that story. It's such a remarkable resilience from the lady there
because despite the challenges, they're still trying to run the business in
Ukraine, still trying to pay people and somehow trying to pick up the pieces of
their broken lives. You can listen to this entire series on Business Daily, just
search for Business Daily wherever you get your podcasts from and I truly
recommend this. But Sergio and Rebecca, you've been listening to these stories
as well for now on the show. Let's talk about this. The humanitarian cost of
this conflict and the fact that the refugees from Ukraine have been forced to
settle in different parts of Europe and even in the UK, what's the impact on the
economy of the countries that they go to? Rebecca, first you and then Sergio.
Well, I mean, ultimately, there should be some sort of positive impact
potentially provided that there is a path for many of those refugees to find
employment and to settle and ultimately contribute to the economic life of those
cities and towns that they settle in. I mean, the question longer term, I
suppose, for Ukraine too though is as you sort of see refugees settling into new
lives overseas and of course, those military losses in Ukraine, but also saps a
sort of potential workforce in Ukraine itself and has these sort of corollary
effects as described there. Unemployment rate in Ukraine is by one measure about
40%. So it's extraordinary high. Absolutely. And Sergio, when I was speaking
earlier to Alizia from Poland, one of the things that we were discussing was the
pressure it brings to the resources in the country as well because the influx of
refugees has also led to increase in housing needs on a scale that is strongly
exceeding construction capacity according to the Polish Economic Institute. And
this is a pressure that many countries, including Colombia, also face when it
comes to refugees coming in the country. Yes, absolutely. Since 2014, Colombia
received about 1.9 million Venezuelan citizens and of course, it does cause a
strain on the healthcare system, the education system, et cetera. But the other
thing that was mentioned that I think it's important to point it out is that
immigrants also push away the aggregate demand curve. That is, they grow the
country's aggregate demand because they also consume things that local
businesses produce, local businesses thrive on there being more demand. So many
of the anti-immigrant movements globally have focused on the negative
externalities of having migrants come to their countries, but very few of them
see migrants as potentially boosting the economy in times of crisis or
preventing there being recessions by virtue of the aggregate demand that they're
putting on the economy. So I agree with what Rebecca said, but I also think
migration is a necessity for some people and as human beings, we ought not to
put obstacles on it. Absolutely. And the other question that one would ask with
the conflict now going beyond the year, the question is that when will this end?
And hopefully, when the conflict ends, when Ukrainians which are settled, who
are settled outside the country want to go back, what happens then? What happens
to those economies as well, Rebecca? Yes, it will be a question. I mean, I think
ultimately when you do see these big sort of mass waves of immigration, those
sort of tend to then persist onwards and that you do see diaspora communities
continuing and immigration tends not to be bilateral, tends not to just be from
A to B, but create a sort of network of back and forth. So I mean, I don't think
we can expect to see some sort of massive return in waves that cost the economy,
but certainly there will be a fallout. And in part, it will also correlate to
the speed and pace of reconstruction in Ukraine itself as a big emphasis in
Europe on the reconstruction effort, precisely how much funding is going to be
directed and where those focuses are going to be. So part of it is going to
depend on the extent to which Ukraine can really sort of rebuild and get their
GDP up and going and get business up and going again. Absolutely. The cost of
rebuilding Ukraine is another big talking point. And hopefully, once this war
ends sooner, we can have that conversation. The better it is for the world. But
Sergia and Rebecca, thank you for being with us on this half of Business
Matters. We continue talking more about stories that are shaping your world from
the business news. On the other side, we'll also be talking about should
companies be held liable for harmful content promoted by the algorithm. So stay
with us. You can also check out more stories on Business Matters. Just search
for Business Matters wherever you get your podcast. It's the Bila Gupta, see you
on the other side after the news. This is the BBC World Service exploring the
seriously fun work of the Flying Seagull Project. My name is Captain Bash. Ash
has been on a mission to bring fun and frivolity to disadvantaged children,
children in refugee camps, in orphanages and care homes. These kids probably
have gone through some of the worst traumas and they don't have access to
counsellors or therapists. Ash and the seagulls aren't therapists, they're
clowns. So they do what they do best to help, escapism and fun. Give them
something to wake up excited about, give them something to go to bed giggling
about. Otherwise, what is the point? When the Greek government allowed children
in refugee camps to go to school, the kids who'd been working with the seagulls
did far better than the other kids. If they can believe themselves to be
limitless and valuable, then maybe they can go into the next challenge of their
life with that arsenal of self-confidence. Flying Seagulls. Child's Play.
Tuesday at 9.30pm and 20pmt. You're listening to Business Matters from the BBC
World Service with me, Devina Gupta, coming up in the next half hour. Is it time
that social media companies change their online content promotion rules? This
debate has now gone all the way up to the US top court. More on that in a bit.
And are companies ready for four days a week? That's all after the latest world
news. BBC News, I'm John Shea. Days before the anniversary of Russia's invasion
of Ukraine, President Biden has given a defiant speech, painting Ukraine's
struggle as a generational conflict for freedom. He insisted the West had not
plotted to attack Russia, as asserted by President Putin, in a stridently anti-
Western speech. President Zelensky has dismissed criticism from the veteran
Italian politician Silvio Belisconi during a visit to Kiev by the Italian Prime
Minister Giorgio Maloney. Mr Belisconi suggested Ukraine was to blame for the
war. China's top diplomat Wang Yi is in Moscow for talks. Mr Wang told the
Russian Security Council secretary Nikolai Patrushev that relations between the
two countries remained as hard as a rock. He said the two sides discussed their
willingness to oppose all forms of bullying. A court in New York says victims of
the 9-11 attacks in 2001 by Al-Qaeda militants are not entitled to Afghan
central bank funds frozen in the United States. The judge said it would mean
recognising the Taliban as the legitimate government in Afghanistan. A New York
court has found Mexico's former security chief guilty of taking bribes to allow
safe passage for drugs. Canaro Garcia Luna took millions of dollars from the
Sinaloa drug cartel. The US authorities have ordered a train operator to clean
up contamination after a train carrying hundreds of tons of chemicals derailed
in the state of Ohio earlier this month. The resulting fire released toxic
fumes. Iran has imposed sanctions on the 36 EU and British individuals and
organisations, accusing them of supporting terrorism. The EU imposed similar
measures on Tehran a day earlier. The European Food and Safety Agency has
recommended that laying hands on broiler chickens are no longer kept in cages.
The study was designed to inform legislation on environmentally friendly food
production. Welcome back here with Business Matters with me, Devina Gupta. A
show where we talk about the business news shaping your world with our guests
from the opposite sides of the world. We have guests from Hong Kong and Colombia
joining us. On this half of the show we talk about Panda diplomacy. Have you
ever heard of it? Think about it in just a bit. We'll be talking more. And four
days a week. What do you think about it? We have Sergio Guzman joining us from
Colombia where he runs his own risk analysis company and we have Rebecca Chung-
Wilkins, senior Asia correspondent with Bloomberg joining us from Hong Kong. So
thank you both of you for staying with us. Let's get to the story. We are
tracking at this hour. Should tech companies be liable for harmful content
promoted by their algorithms? That's the question. Rebecca, what do you feel
about it? Well, I suppose this is a long-standing issue for the US and it's
challenged to find a way to regulate big tech and in a way also protect its
users from that sort of harmful content. But I suppose as two sides to this,
it's not just the algorithm that is producing particular sort of viewing, but
there's also extent to which users themselves are uploading some of this content
too. And so there's a sort of dual responsibility here. All right. Dual
responsibility lies with you, Sergio. Do you agree? I think so. But it behooves
on the platform where this content sits to be moderated by responsible people
who should have, because they're profiting from this content being on the
platform, they should have standards for what kind of content they allow. But
what this case is more about is what kind of content they promote following a
user's interaction. So let's get to the case that's been discussed all the way
in the US top court. It stems from a lawsuit against the tech giant Google by
the family of Noemi Godzallis, a 23-year-old US citizen who was killed by the
members of the Islamic State in Paris in November 2015. BBC's North America
business correspondent, Michelle Fleury, from New York has more. Eight years
ago, Noemi Godzallis, a 23-year-old American exchange student, was killed at a
restaurant in Paris by ISIS gunmen. The family in seeking justice for her death
is targeting Google's video platform YouTube, alleging that by distributing
terrorist training videos on its site, the tech giant acted as a recruiting
platform for ISIS in violation of US laws about helping terrorists. Now at the
center of this landmark case is a federal law forged in the earliest days of
today's tech giants, Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act, which
essentially stops companies like Google and Twitter from being liable for things
that users post on its site. It gives the company's platform rather than publish
a status. During Tuesday's session, Google lawyer Lisa Black argued that the
shield provided by Section 230 was crucial to tech companies' ability to provide
useful and safe content to its users, while the Gonzalez family lawyer Eric
Schnapper urged the court to narrow those protections. This is the US Supreme
Court's first review of the law. After hearing the Google case, it will hear
another involving social media company Twitter. Section 230 has emerged as a
political lightning rod because of its ability to change the future of online
speech and content moderation, not to mention the potential implications for the
business models of these internet giants. Both Congress and the White House are
keen to revamp it, but have yet to agree on what the problem is and what any
cure might look like. That was BBC's Michelle Flori joining us from New York.
But even as the case is going on, one of the judges has said it is so
complicated and it is confusing. Right now, as the case is being heard. But
let's talk about the social media content that comes again and again and again
on many of our feeds. Rebecca, have you experienced that? Yes, certainly. And I
think that sort of repeated viewing, whatever it may be, down to the algorithm
is precisely the problem here. And in some ways, I was struck as well by the
justices' comments just saying, you know, I actually frankly don't understand
this. I'm sorry, it's too complex, which was sort of an extraordinary admission,
I thought. But this issue that people sort of are being consistently shown,
let's say, conspiracy theory videos or anti-vaccine content or whatever it may
be as suggested content, it's a really difficult problem to fix for the platform
companies itself. And, you know, the uncomfortable reality that we're seeing,
particularly in this case, is that it's not something that companies probably
want to do. In some ways, this is sort of their secret source. It's what keeps
people and a lot of people coming back for fresh content. Well, a lot of times
it's also the marketers that depend on these kind of algorithms as well, isn't
it? Because, Saju, when you look at the echo chamber, social media sometimes
creates with the kind of words that we've discussed earlier, you may want to use
and you may want to see that content. It benefits marketers as well. It's all
about trying to get to that micro decision making of a consumer and trying to
influence them to buy the product. Absolutely. I think these websites also look
at how they can profit off of these micro decisions by then promoting content
that is similar because their entire scheme is based on you spending more time
on the website, being subject to different ads. So they're going to bake you
into watching another video and another video and another video or to follow the
rabbit hole very literally to look at things that you would otherwise not
necessarily be beholden to. Absolutely. And this case, as we said, is currently
underway in the US. Court will be following that closely. But let's move on to
something which is coming in from Japan. It's quite surprising when I read the
story earlier today and it's this. Well, that is from the crowd which bid
farewell to Shanshan. And Shanshan basically is a Japan-born giant panda. You
heard it right, a panda which left for China from the Tokyo Zoo where she was
raised. So thousands turned out to say their last goodbye at the zoo. Some even
cried as they took photographs of the panda. I'll miss Shanshan. He almost
became part of my life and I hope the panda will be a good mother. I feel happy
when I imagine Shanshan's life after returning to China. When Shanshan is
allowed to meet with the public, I will immediately fly to China. Well, on that
comment, I can see many smiling faces in the gallery as well. But Shanshan was
sent to China under an agreement in which giant pandas are loaned to zoos around
the world. China maintains ownership of any such loan bears and even their
offspring. So sometimes these pandas are also gifted to other countries around
the world by China under confidential terms. And this is what many called panda
diplomacy. Henry Neschles is a panda expert and he's author of The Way of the
Panda, the Curious History of Animals of China's Political Animal. And he's been
an expert on panda diplomacy. Incredibly, the panda was only discovered by
science. Amazingly recent that we found out about this amazing animal. And for
the first nearly 100 years, China was not in a position to exploit this. There
was a civil war going on in China and British were there, lots of colonial
powers in China. And they were the ones that were exploiting pandas in those
early decades of the 20th century. But when the Communist Party came to power in
1949, they shut down everything. The West had no part in China. And from that
point onwards, the Chinese state quite clearly fashioned this animal to be
synonymous with China itself. It is very useful for China, uniquely Chinese. It
only exists in the bamboo forests in Sichuan and in the Qingling Mountains. They
deliberately fashioned it to be synonymous with China. And then from the 70s, as
they opened up, began to use it initially in this gift as gifts and then these
loans. What kind of money we're talking about, Henry, here? When a country
receives these pandas from China, how much money is involved in these loan
agreements? Yeah, the loan agreements, they're pretty secretive about them. So
written into that contract is if a panda is born to the zoo, then the zoo will
typically have it for three years. If a baby is born to the pandas that are on
loan, then there's a one-off hit that the zoo has to pay China between $300,000
to $500,000, I think, for a baby panda. And all of those details are written
into that contract. So that's all set in stone. The money, the annual fee of a
million dollars per pair and any sort of one-off bonus, I think it's a one-off
bonus, you know, that goes back is also then supposed to go back to the
conservation of pandas in the wild in China. Well, of course, details of where
the money is going is really hard to get. But I was reading, Henry, that many of
these loans extended, especially in recent years, have actually coincided with
major trade deals between China and the country which is receiving the panda.
For example, Australia, France and Canada have actually received pandas after
agreeing to sell nuclear technology and uranium to China. So as a wildlife
conservationist as well, how do you view this? I'm a little bit cynical. There
are, we think, but we still don't really know, but about 1,800 pandas left in
the wild. And there are just an increasing number of pandas in captivity now.
And the problem is these two populations, the wild and the captive, we can't
really connect them back. In conservation, we would like to breed an animal in
captivity and then return it to the wild. And we've not cracked that yet. What
happens to normally these pandas who have to be returned to China after the
lease is over? So they will enter the captive population in China, which is
quite large. And then we will try to breed from them there. Well, that was Henry
Neshol the panda expert. Rebecca, this has to be, like, they have to be
cuddliest diplomats from China. How much has China benefited from it? And what's
been the build up behind China's panda diplomacy? Well, in its sort of current
iteration, it's really been around for about 50 or 60 years or so now. The first
really notable exchange was this actually the exchange between Nixon and Mao
Zedong after we had that sort of historic summit in the 70s. And actually, in
exchange for the two pandas that China at that point gave to the US, the US in
kind returned it with two ox. So probably you try to say that, you know, US
certainly got the better end of that deal. But, you know, as you say, it's been
one of the most visible forms of diplomacy. And in many ways, as you sort of
hinted at, it's created this softer edge to other more mercantile goals when
China has initiated trade deals or strategic tech deals or whatever it may be.
So it has certainly helped smooth the way. I would just add that the popularity
of pandas is certainly not limited to the donor and recipient countries. I mean,
it is riding very high. The return of Xiangxiang from Japan back to Chengdu is
riding very high in Chinese social media platforms today. There's a lot of
discussion of people looking forward to welcoming it back. And also other live
videos which are streaming from the zoo just to project that softer pitch, if I
can say so, of China when they talk about these black and white giant pandas?
Yeah, absolutely. And part of their popularity, I think, overseas has been that
it's, you know, almost impossible to get your hands on a panda unless it sort of
is officially sanctioned by the government itself. So in some ways, you know,
the government has seized on this opportunity to really sort of manage it in a
very public spectacle. And of course, there are concerns about pandas being bred
in captivity for this kind of exchange and how China sort of controls, as you
said, Rebecca, who gets these pandas? They attract lots of tourists in the zoos
around the world as well. I was reading about 600 pandas are there around zoos
and wildlife parks around the world. But Sergio, when you think about panda
diplomacy and such softer virtues from China, what is the first impression that
comes at a time when we're talking about such geopolitical tensions around the
world as well? And China's role with it, the trade tensions that we talk about
on one hand, and then you see the panda diplomacy. Well, first of all, I'd like
to say I'm pretty jealous of the guy who gets to be called panda expert on the
radio. Kudos to you, sir. I will say, you know, Latin America has no pandas.
Africa to the far to the to the extent that I know has no pandas. And so I do
think panda diplomacy is something that is very well appreciated by Western
countries and particularly high income countries. But it's not necessarily a
privilege that has been extended elsewhere. And I hope that, you know, Rebecca
can correct me if I'm wrong. But here in Latin America, we are seeing a growing
influence by China. But it's not accompanied with any of the soft power. It's
not accompanied with any of the, you know, efforts to make China much more
appealing to the public opinion in the Americas. And, you know, maybe that's
also telling of where China's strategy is now versus where it used to be 50
years ago. Well, that's interesting. And I can certainly tell you that one of
the regions where China has extended this diplomacy just last year is the Middle
East. A pair of giant pandas were gifted to Qatar. And this was ahead of the
World Cup that the country hosted, making it the first time that China has
extended this panda diplomacy to Middle East. And two pandas known in Chinese as
Sihai and Jingjing would now be at their national park. And this is interesting.
But well, just one question, Sergio, just because you said you were jealous of
the guy who's called a pandax bird on a radio, given a chance, would you click a
photograph with Manda? Absolutely. Yeah, I thought it was one. Rebecca, have you
had the chance? Oh, I'm absolutely following this story of Jiang Zang's return
from Japan this morning. And I'm just curious to know what have some of these
social media posts said? I mean, it's overwhelmingly positive. You've been
really looking forward to it coming back. There is enormous sort of domestic
fondness for pandas. Well, there could be the man that we spoke with earlier
from Japan who say that if he's allowed to visit China, he would definitely like
to go and visit his favorite panda, Jingjing. But thank you so much to talk
about this, because this has been definitely interesting. I've never seen a
panda in my life, and I would hope so that I get to at least hug one of them.
They're just so cute. They're dirtier than you'd expect. Oh, come on. You can't
say they are dirty. They're such cute, cuddly babies. But that's where I'm
telling you, that's where it's the cuddliest diplomat. It's not for anything
else. But what I do want to talk now about is shorter working week, because,
Sajja, you said you're a tough boss. And right now, 61 businesses volunteer to
take part in a four-day week survey. Almost all of them now say they are making
the new working pattern permanent, because sick days were down by more than two-
thirds, and workers reported being less stressed, less tired and happier in the
UK. But does this work in the other parts of the world as well? Simon Urcell is
the managing director of environmental consultancy firm Tyler Grinch. We've seen
our happiness go up significantly, and we've seen our fatigue come down through
the trial. So we can prove that our team are happier, less tired, and are making
more money. It's pretty cool. So how did you do it? Zero admin, I like to call
it. We're trying to get rid of as much of the admin as possible that you didn't
need to do. Our board meetings, where it used to be two hours long, they're now
half an hour. If you give people this incredible incentive of a whole day of
your time a week, they're going to work really hard to become more productive.
So let's go first and try and figure out, Rebecca, that what are the advantages
when companies are struggling to attract staff, and especially in regions where
there is labor shortage as well for skilled worker? Could this be a solution?
Well, I think employee preferences are being weighted extremely heavily now,
particularly because, for example, of those labor shortages, employees do in
some parts of the world very much have the upper hand here. I think the other
experience that has formed this is obviously the pandemic. And it does seem that
hybrid working model that many people have afforded during the pandemic is here
to stay. And indeed, in many cases, has allowed certain groups, so, for example,
working mothers or those who are providing some extra form of domestic labor at
home to give them that flexibility to be able to continue staying in full-time
employment. I think overall, though, in Asia, there is still sort of limits over
just how willing businesses are going to be to entertain some of those sort of
broader cultural shifts, particularly around that shorter workweek. Well, I can
definitely share my experience from India, Rebecca, because although this
particular survey, which was taken in the UK and the study which was there, with
2,900 employees across the UK as part of this pilot, they said that they were
less stressed. 40% were sleeping better. 54% said it was easier to balance work
and home responsibilities. But the working culture in Asia is the one where if
you're not seen working beyond your office hours, usually in many countries and
many companies, it seems that you're not working at all. So there is a big
perception about just giving extra to the work that you're doing. Yes, and
absolutely. And I did speak to one senior manager recently at a bank who
essentially said his issue with work from home is that his employees don't come
in on a Monday, don't come in on a Friday, and effectively they're working a
three-day week. Now, I'm sure that comes with a heavy dose of hyperbole and some
amount of frustration. But I do think that, as you say, the perception is there
that people are not as productive. Many companies in India found it very
difficult when the pandemic struck initially and there were people working from
home because they couldn't trust whether the employees were working at all or
not. So there was this trust deficit as well. Sergio, is that what prevents
companies from accepting this four days a week? Because you said that your firm,
you would be okay saying four plus one, but not four days a week. Yeah. And it's
not that I don't trust my employees. It's that there's a lot of work to be done.
And cutting the week by a full eight hours is not going to give me as a manager
the time that I need to get projects done and delivered and to clients. And
adding more staff is simply not an option at this point. So for now, I think
having a five-day work week with one day working from home is flexible. But on
top of that, there's a demand for jobs. There's not a plethora of employers
doing the same thing. So my staff are not necessarily going to resign because I
don't give them a four-day work week because nobody is going to give them a
four-day work week. But when this becomes more the norm, companies like mine are
going to have to reassess. That's not the case right now. And can we talk a
little bit from the informal economy perspective as well? Because while these
conversations of worker mental health, well-being and work-life balance always
happen for the privileged class, it seems at times, that it's for the formal
economy, for the informal workers. They often don't have a choice. They are
people who are depending on daily earnings. Absolutely, Davina. I think you hit
the nail in the head. In Colombia, 60% of workers are informal. So while the 40%
of lucky workers are discussing how to improve the level of privileges they can
afford, the majority of informal workers have to work seven days a week trying
to make ends meet without a possibility of obtaining a pension or living off
savings. And so I do think that this is an issue that is very much foreign to us
in Colombia right now. And Rebecca, in a labor surplus region where it's very
easy to get labor for low cost, and especially when you talk about China, do you
think this is possible? It's certainly hard to imagine, particularly, as Sergio
says, in that sort of informal sector. You can see that services like food
delivery services and so on were extremely in high demand during the pandemic,
particularly in China. And actually when China, large parts of China went under
lockdown, there was enormous pressure on people's income because so many of
those services were suddenly halted. But also the other side of this is whether
Gen Z, with its new work culture, could at least force some companies to
rethink. In India, I know there's a discussion that is happening about this with
many companies which are startups and they have flexible working culture. Do you
see that change? It's hard to imagine, to be frank. I mean, in China, there is
quite a significant youth unemployment problem at the moment. It's near record
highs, around 20%. And there has been so much social disruption over both COVID
and then the reopening after COVID. The unemployment is a key, key issue. We've
also seen these crackdowns on the private sector, which some fear are going to
hamper innovation. And these types of sort of more experimental efforts. So it's
really hard to see much innovation in that sector right now. It's simply the
matter, I think, for many young people just getting into a job after they
graduate. Serje, Serje, if Gen Z workers ask you, consider this, would you, as a
boss? No. Oh, God. All right. All right. That has to be the last word on this
story. But thank you, Serje and Rebecca, for joining us on Business Matters. And
if you've been listening, thank you for being with us. It's always a pleasure to
have your company. And from our team of Hannah, Alex, Gideon and me, Dvina
Gupta, thank you for being on and listening to us on Business Matters. If you
like the program, too, tell us on world.business at bbc.co.uk. Also tell us what
you don't like, what would you like us to talk about. We're always happy to hear
from you. Check out our podcast, Just Search, for Business Matters, wherever you
get your podcasts. Till next time, it's Namaste. This is the BBC World Service,
and here is Harriet Gilbert to tell you about the next World Book Club. A
bizarre and quite extraordinary story that challenges social norms with themes
of feminism, politics and sexual corruption, the novel follows the life of a
young sex worker who enjoys great success until she starts turning into a pig.
I'll be in Paris with author Marie Dariosec to discuss her novel, Pig Tales.
World Book Club from the 4th of March. In 30 minutes. I'm Misha Glenny, a former
BBC correspondent, and I want to tell you about 1709 when Peter the Great's army
defeats the marauding Swedish forces at Poltava to find out how Peter
transformed Russia into one of the most powerful countries on Earth. Listen to
it.