TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The former health secretary Matt Hancock has disputed a claim that leaked
WhatsApp messages show he rejected expert advice on Covid testing for care homes
at the start of the pandemic. China has rejected a suggestion by the head of the
FBI that a laboratory leak in the city of Wuhan was the likeliest source of the
pandemic. The remains of a baby have been found by police searching for the
missing child of a couple arrested earlier this week. The Prime Minister of
Greece has said tragic human error caused a rail crash that killed at least 43
people. The Duke and Duchess of Sussex have been asked to leave their UK home in
the grounds of Wintercastle. Government decisions on pandemic issues, including
Covid testing, care homes and masks in schools, are under renewed scrutiny after
the leak of a series of WhatsApp messages linked to the former health secretary
Matt Hancock. Among the most serious allegations from the Daily Telegraph is
that Mr Hancock rejected advice about testing procedures for care homes in
England in April 2020. He strenuously denied the claim and is said to be
considering legal action. Our first report is from our political correspondent
Ian Watson. The ministerial mantra in the early weeks of the pandemic was that
the government was following the science. So critics have seized on leaked
WhatsApp messages from the then health secretary Matt Hancock, which suggest
that he changed his mind about accepting clinical advice to test everyone going
into care homes in England. In one message on April 14th 2020, he appears to be
enthusiastic, but later that day he decided to restrict testing only to those
coming from hospitals. His spokesman has suggested that the leaked messages
portray a partial and misleading picture and that the apparent change of heart
was because Mr Hancock had been told wider testing wasn't deliverable. In the
Commons, the health minister Helen Whateley, who had been the minister for
social care for much of the pandemic, blamed a lack of available tests. In a
situation where we had the capacity to test at most a few thousand each day,
tough decisions about prioritisation had to be made, decisions that were taken
on the best public health advice available. Professor Alan McNally helped to set
up the Milton Keynes Lighthouse testing lab, the first of three large sites
which processed Covid tests. He told the World at One that when ministers
decided to restrict testing to those leaving hospitals for care homes, they
should have been aware that much greater availability was just a matter of weeks
away. It's true that on the 14th of April, the testing capacity was limited, so
in the Milton Keynes lab we did a couple of thousand tests that day. But we were
very, very much in the middle of the ramp up that within a couple of weeks would
have seen us deliver, just at Milton Keynes, somewhere in the region of 30 to 40
thousand tests per day. It wasn't until June 2020 that every care home resident
in England was offered testing. And further leaked messages from August 2020
have suggested that both the government's chief medical officer for England and
the chief scientific adviser had doubts about the effectiveness of telling more
than two million extremely clinically vulnerable people to shield at home, but
that the guidance had remained in place. The Department for Health has been
asked for a response. The official Covid inquiry is still in its early stages,
but the leaks have once again raised questions of how and how quickly the
government tried to mitigate the impact of a global pandemic. In the middle of
April 2020, around 20,000 Covid tests were carried out each day in the UK. Our
social affairs editor Alison Holt has been looking back at what was happening in
care homes at the time. During the week when Matt Hancock sent his messages
about testing, warnings about the impact of Covid on care home residents were
reaching a crescendo. Medical bosses told the government reliable testing was
needed and concluded that generally social care appeared an afterthought. Two of
the UK's largest care home providers spoke out about the number of deaths they
were seeing. In fact, that was the week when Covid deaths amongst care home
residents hit their peak in England and Wales. Testing everyone might have been
the best plan, but official figures show the capacity to do that was very
limited. Experts later concluded the two main ways Covid got into care homes was
from patients discharged from hospital and through staff moving between homes.
In mid-April, staff were struggling to get tests. Also, few people were moving
into care homes from the community, so it appears testing was targeted. For many
families, it may be hard to square Mr Hancock's leaked messages with the claim
made a month later that he had thrown a protective ring around care homes.
Probably, only the public inquiry, armed with all the facts, will be able to
judge the decisions made. Some of the messages cover the thinking behind
decisions affecting schools and children. Here's our education editor, Brenwyn
Jefferies. This latest selection of leaked exchanges gives an insight into
decisions around the precautions put in place as schools in England reopened
fully in September 2020. The school year starts earlier in Scotland, where the
First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon, had already made masks compulsory for secondary
pupils in corridors and other crowded areas. This was in line with the advice
from the World Health Organisation, but in England, ministers initially said it
would not be introduced. The Telegraph says leaked messages suggest the Chief
Medical Officer, Chris Whitty, had no strong feeling either way, and Boris
Johnson questioned whether a U-turn was really needed. But the Downing Street
Director of Communications, Lee Cain, is reported to have asked whether it was
worth fighting, as Scotland had taken the step. Simon Case, then leading civil
service Covid efforts, is said to have warned that nervous parents will freak
out if Scotland's example wasn't followed. There were also disagreements over
the rule of six, which set the maximum number who could gather during Christmas
2020. Helen Wakeley, the Social Care Minister, said in a message it would make
such a difference to families if children were not included. Matt Hancock
replied that number 10 didn't want to shift an inch. The journalist who passed
Matt Hancock's WhatsApp messages to the Daily Telegraph has said she received a
somewhat menacing message from the former Health Secretary after they were
published last night. In an interview with Talk TV, Isabel Oakeshott also
confirmed she had broken a non-disclosure agreement but insisted releasing the
material was in the public interest. She was given the messages as part of her
work with Mr Hancock on his book, Pandemic Diaries. This report from our media
editor, Katie Razzill. Isabel Oakeshott is well-versed in scoops and
controversy. At the Sunday Times, she broke the story that saw the former
Liberal Democrat Cabinet Minister Chris Hewn jailed in 2013 for lying about a
speeding ticket. Hewn's ex-wife, Vicky Price, who'd spoken to Isabel Oakeshott
and made the story public, also went to jail. At the Mail on Sunday in 2019,
Oakeshott's reporting of remarks made by Britain's then US Ambassador Sir Kim
Darroch about President Trump brought about the diplomat's resignation. And her
unauthorised biography of David Cameron, which she wrote with the Conservative
donor Lord Ashcroft, included an unsubstantiated allegation about a sex act on a
dead pig's head. Her latest revelations, what the Telegraph has called its
lockdown files, were defended on The World at One as being in the public
interest by the paper's associate editor, Camilla Tominey. It's perfectly
legitimate to question how the decisions were made, to ask whether the normal
protocols went dangerously out of the window as people made public health policy
that affected the lives and liberties of the entire country. It's perfectly
right to apply a degree of journalistic scrutiny to that. Ms Oakeshott herself
wrote in the paper that she felt compelled to release the WhatsApp messages
because the public inquiry would take years to conclude. But there are questions
around what Matt Hancock and his supporters see as a gross betrayal. And big
question this throws up is why did Matt Hancock choose her as a collaborator on
his book? In the morning papers, the Daily Telegraph leads on the leak of
pandemic WhatsApp messages for the second day running. It reveals that Matt
Hancock allegedly mounted a rearguard action to close schools, despite the then
Education Secretary, Sir Gavin Williamson, battling tooth and nail to keep them
open. Writing in the Telegraph, Sir Gavin ponders whether he should have
resigned when it was announced that schools would close for a second time as he
felt so personally upset about it. He says his plea to put pupils first was
ignored, leaving him absolutely crushed and devastated. The online-only
Independent dubs the ferrari the WhatsApp war, adding that Rishi Sunak is now
under pressure to fast-track the Covid inquiry to provide answers. Focusing on
the earlier allegations that Mr Hancock rejected advice about testing procedures
for care homes, the Metro says grieving families are sickened, the Mirror calls
it the tragic betrayal. The Chinese government has criticised the FBI after the
American Intelligence Agency said a laboratory leak in Wuhan was the most likely
source of Covid-19. Beijing says there is no credibility to the Bureau's first
public comments on the origins of the pandemic. Here's our North America
correspondent, John Sudworth. Claims have long swirled around Wuhan's
laboratories. Now three years after the start of the pandemic, they've been
raised again with the comments from the director of the FBI, Christopher Wray.
The FBI has for quite some time now assessed that the origins of the pandemic
are most likely a potential lab incident in Wuhan. So here you're talking about
a potential leak from a Chinese government-controlled lab that killed millions
of Americans. From the start, many scientists believed that Covid had passed
naturally from animals to humans in a Wuhan market. But with Wuhan's
laboratories known to have been collecting and experimenting on coronaviruses,
there's an alternative possibility that a researcher became accidentally
infected with a virus he or she was working on. The World Health Organization
team that travelled to Wuhan in 2021 called the lab leak theory extremely
unlikely, but there were concerns about China's political management of the
inquiry, something acknowledged by one member of that team, virologist Marion
Koopmans. It's difficult to know where the science ends and where the politics
starts. This was not a neutral, let's just have an open scientific debate. No,
that's clear. Despite the FBI's public comments, the US intelligence agencies
remain divided. And without new hard evidence, some scientists fear that one of
the biggest questions of our time, where did Covid come from, may never be
convincingly answered. Police searching for a baby near Brighton say they found
an infant's remains. The search began on Monday following the arrest of
Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, who'd been living rough with their newborn
baby for several weeks. Our correspondent Frankie McCamley is near where the
remains were found. The development was announced at an urgent news conference
shortly after police said there had been a significant update. Officers
confirmed a baby's remains had been found in woodland in Brighton, close to
where Constance Martin and Mark Gordon were arrested on Monday. Detective
Superintendent Lewis Bassford from the Metropolitan Police gave this statement.
This is an outcome that myself and that many officers who have been part of this
search had hoped would not happen. I recognise the impact this news will have on
the many people who have been following the story closely and can assure them
that we will do everything we possibly can to establish what has happened. Local
residents have already been leaving candles next to a police cordon where
searches have been carried out this week. A police tent has been erected in the
woodland as the investigation continues through the night to find out exactly
what happened to the infant. Officers say a post-mortem will be carried out in
due course. Miss Martin and Mr Gordon have been detained for another 36 hours
for questioning after being arrested on suspicion of gross negligence
manslaughter. The parents of a disabled teenager from Powys who died after
becoming morbidly obese have been jailed for gross negligence manslaughter.
Kayleigh Titford, who was 16, was found in filthy conditions at the family home
in Newtown by emergency services in October 2020. Our Wales correspondent Hal
Griffith followed the sentencing hearing at Swansea Crown Court, the first in
Wales to be televised. Kayleigh Titford lived with a spinal condition and used a
wheelchair but for most of her childhood she had remained active and
independent, playing basketball and attending a mainstream school. When the
first national lockdown in March 2020 meant she had to stay at home, she became
entirely reliant on her parents for care. Their response was to leave her
immobile in bed for over six months, lying in squalid conditions and living off
takeaway food. Her body became so obese, inflamed and infected, in the end it
couldn't cope. On the night of her death, her father, Alan Titford, ignored her
screams, sending her a text message telling her to stop. As he sentenced Titford
and his partner, Sarah Lloyd-Jones, Judge Justice Griffith said they were both
fully and equally culpable for their daughter's death. This was a horrifying
case, a case of sustained neglect, leading to the death of a completely
dependent, bedridden, vulnerable, disabled child at the hands of her own
parents. Questions have been raised over whether the local authorities could and
should have done more to protect Kayleigh, but the judge made clear offers of
help had been ignored. Alan Titford was jailed for seven and a half years. Sarah
Lloyd-Jones will serve a six-year sentence. The Prime Minister of Greece has
blamed what he called tragic human error for last night's train crash which
killed at least 43 people. More than 70 others are in hospital after the head-on
collision between a passenger service and a freight train. The Transport
Minister has resigned. Authorities say they've charged a local station master
with manslaughter by negligence. From Greece, here's our Europe correspondent,
Nick Beek. It is a horrific sight. Emergency workers picking through the
remnants of one carriage all but destroyed, another totally gutted by fire. The
train had been carrying hundreds of people, mostly students, who'd been
celebrating a Greek Orthodox holiday. One survivor described the moments after
his intercity service crashed into a freight train head-on. We heard a big bang.
It was a nightmarish ten seconds. We were turning over in the carriage until we
fell on our sides and until the commotion stopped. Then there was panic. The
fire was immediate. As we were turning over, we were being burned. Fire was
right and left. Identification of victims has been hard. The fire was intense.
This is Greece's worst railway crash and it shouldn't have happened. A 59-year-
old signal master working in the city of Larissa, 15 miles away, has been
charged with manslaughter by negligence. He has blamed a possible technical
failure. Visiting the carnage, Greece's Prime Minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis,
promised to find out what had gone so catastrophically wrong. But who to blame
is not a straightforward question. There have been repeated concerns over the
lack of signals in Greece, with many drivers reported to receive instructions
over mobile phone calls. This evening the Transport Minister resigned, saying
his efforts to improve a railway that was, he claimed, not fit for the current
century hadn't been enough to prevent such an accident. The Duke and Duchess of
Sussex have confirmed that they've been asked to vacate their home in the UK.
Frogmore Cottage in the grounds of Windsor Castle was given to the couple in
2019. The Royal Correspondent, Sarah Campbell, reports. Frogmore Cottage is
where Prince Harry, Meghan and their children have stayed on their infrequent
trips back to the UK. Sources close to the couple say they thought of it as
their forever home, a gift from the late Queen. That they've been asked to leave
is, the BBC understands, a source of disappointment. One concern of theirs is
understood to be safety and security. Where now will the Prince stay with his
family when visiting the UK? The logistics are still being sorted out, with
financial issues to be resolved. Not least that the couple paid £2.4 million
back to the Treasury to cover renovation costs and rent. Buckingham Palace says
this is a private family matter. Reports that Prince Andrew has been offered
Frogmore Cottage have not been confirmed. The Justice Secretary, Dominic Raab,
has announced plans to set up an independent public advocate to support
survivors and the families of those killed in major disasters. He told the
Commons the new body, made up of a panel of experts, would advise victims where
to access help, speak on their behalf and assist them during subsequent
inquiries and inquests. The announcement is part of the Government's response to
a report written six years ago by the former Bishop of Liverpool, James Jones,
about the experiences of the families of Hillsborough victims. Here's our Home
Affairs correspondent, Tom Symons. The families of 97 Hillsborough victims have
fought for 34 years for answers and justice. Those who survived or were bereaved
by the Grenfell Tower fire are still waiting after five years. In both cases,
victims have complained of the challenges they faced, obtaining everything from
health and financial help to information about their involvement in public
inquiries and inquests. The Justice Secretary, Dominic Raab, has decided against
a single independent public advocate in favour of a permanent panel of experts.
Social workers, doctors, ex-civil servants, emergency responders, community
leaders and media advisers. They'll step in to help families of the bereaved and
those with life-changing injuries. James Jones, the former Bishop of Liverpool,
who chaired an independent panel on the Hillsborough disaster, said the
Government's announcement was a start. There needs to be much more detail about
what the advocate will do, but I'm now urging the Government to respond in full
to the 25 recommendations that were there in the report that I was asked to
write on learning from the Hillsborough families' experiences so that these
things should never happen again. One of them is that families should be given
clear information about what investigations and inquiries will take place and
help to take part. But Labour said the Government's proposals today fell short.
The advocates' panel didn't have the power to obtain information on behalf of
victims and it would be for the Government to decide how the panel should react
to specific disasters. Dominic Raab said there might be differences of opinion
between victims. The proposal will need new legislation, which is still to come.
US intelligence agencies say it's very unlikely the mystery illness known as
Havana syndrome was caused by attacks from another government. The first cases
emerged among American diplomats in Cuba seven years ago. Our Cuba correspondent
Will Grant reports. When the first cases of a mysterious ailment were reported
among diplomats at the US Embassy in Havana in 2016, patients complained of a
ringing sensation in their ears, severe headaches, discomfort and dizziness.
Quickly dubbed Havana syndrome, some pointed the finger of suspicion at an
unnamed hostile foreign government working inside Cuba to attack the US
diplomats, possibly using a previously unknown sonic weapon or as a by-product
of electronic surveillance. Now the findings of a years-long intelligence report
involving seven agencies has dismissed the theory of a deliberate attack by a
hostile foreign government. Such a reason was considered very unlikely, the
report concluded. It also dismissed the idea that it was inadvertently caused by
surveillance from another government. The different agencies involved had
varying levels of confidence in the findings, but overall shared the view that a
foreign government was not behind the so-called Havana syndrome. Five of them
concluded that available intelligence consistently points against the
involvement of US adversaries in causing the reported incidents. Nigeria's
opposition Labour Party says it will mount a legal challenge against the results
of the presidential election which was won by Bola Tinubu of the governing APC.
The polls have been mired in controversy, with allegations of intimidation and
vote-buying. Mr Tinubu said it was a credible election. Our correspondent Mayoni
Jones reports from Lagos. On the day Nigeria woke up to a new president, Lagos'
bustling streets are unusually quiet. Many are still worried there could be a
violent reaction to the result. It hasn't helped that Peter Obi, whose youth-led
campaign upset Nigeria's two-party system, says he'll be challenging the results
in court. The opposition has called the election a sham, a sentiment that's been
echoed in the southeastern state of Anambra, Mr Obi's stronghold. Chukwuemeka is
a tuk-tuk driver in Akwa, the state's capital. Let them just cancel it, because
this one is like they have put corruption on it. They don't want to tell us the
truth. If they want to bring the original result, let them cancel it. We don't
want it. Bolat Tinubu has called for unity after what's been a very divisive
election. But he'll have to work hard if he wants to win over young urban
Nigerians who support Mr Obi. They thought this election would be their chance
to choose a different kind of leader, but they've been left disappointed by the
result. Many worry that Mr Tinubu, who's faced questions about the source of his
enormous wealth, doesn't care about the issues affecting them, including youth
unemployment and corruption. The government's being asked to take urgent action
to help so-called mortgage prisoners who are paying interest rates of more than
8% because they can't switch to a cheaper deal. An estimated 200,000 people had
their mortgages sold on to unregulated investment firms after their original
lenders were nationalised. A report by the London School of Economics,
commissioned by the consumer website Money Saving Expert, found the problem
could be solved for less than £350m. Our economics correspondent Andy Verity
reports. In Woodford Green East London, the interest on Sharon Clarke's standard
variable rate mortgage was already twice as high as the best loans on the market
at 4.1%, before the Bank of England raised rates. Now it's 7.9%, and her monthly
payments have nearly doubled from £868 to £1,607. Sharon's among 200,000
homeowners who took out legitimate regulated mortgages where the loan's worth
95% or more of the house price, with firms such as Northern Rock or Bradford &
Bingley before they were nationalised in the 2008 financial crisis. Loans like
that aren't offered anymore, so she can't remortgage to another lender. I took
the mortgage out with Northern Rock and through no fault of myself or any of the
mortgage prisoners, when I trapped, the governments were the ones who sold, who
bailed out Northern Rock and now we're the ones paying for it. Most borrowers
could still switch to a new deal with their existing lender. But because in 2013
the government sold their regulated mortgages to unregulated investment firms
that don't offer new mortgage deals, making the government £2.4bn in the
process, borrowers like Sharon are trapped. The consumer website Money Saving
Expert says the government has a moral responsibility to help the borrowers and
could offer solutions similar to its Help to Buy scheme to make sure they could
switch loans at a cost of less than £350m. The Treasury said it was open to
practical and proportionate solutions. In the city, the 100 share index ended
the day up 39 points at 7,915. On Wall Street, the Dow Jones closed up five
points at 32,662. On the currency markets, the pound is trading at $1.20.2.
Against the euro, sterling is at 1.12.7, making a euro worth 88.7 pence. Two
more men have been arrested under the Terrorism Act after a police officer was
shot and injured in Oma last week. Police believe Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell was attacked by the dissident Republican group the New IRA. The two
men, who were 33 and 57, have been questioned in Belfast. Five other men
arrested in connection with the attack have been released following interviews.
Clubs have been granted more time to speak to a 47-year-old man. A hearing into
allegations of racism at Yorkshire Cricket Club has been told that the former
England bowler Tim Bresnan used a racial slur towards his team-mate Azim Rafiq's
sister. Bresnan, who has declined to take part in the process, denies the
claims. The England and Wales Cricket Board has been setting out cases against a
number of former players. Our sports editor Dan Rowan was at the hearing. Two
years ago, Yorkshire Cricket Club was plunged into crisis after it was revealed
that the county had taken no disciplinary action against any of the people
involved in the racial harassment of the spin bowler Azim Rafiq. A catalogue of
disrepute charges followed. Today the England and Wales Cricket Board claimed
Yorkshire accepted that it failed to address systemic use of racist and or
discriminatory language over a prolonged period and in relation to multiple
employees and or players of the club. Outlining its case against the former
England bowler Matthew Hoggard, the ECB said he'd admitted using racially
offensive phrases but he denied any discriminatory intent. Another ex-England
star, Tim Bresnan, was said to have used a racial slur against Rafiq's sister in
2014. Bresnan, who also declined to take part in the process, denies the
allegation. Five of those charged have withdrawn from the proceedings, citing
concerns over fairness, leaving the former England captain Michael Vaughan as
the only defendant set to appear. He's accused of making a racist comment to
Rafiq and three other Asian players during a Yorkshire match in 2009. Vaughan,
who has repeatedly denied the claims, stepped back from his broadcasting work at
the BBC last year after he was charged. In football, the lowest ranked side
still in the FA Cup, Grimsby Town of League Two, have knocked out the Premier
League team Southampton. Their 2-1 victory means Grimsby have reached the
quarter-finals of the competition for the first time since 1939. Burnley,
Manchester United and Sheffield United are also through to the last eight.
Painstaking preservation work is being carried out on the medieval throne the
King will sit on when he's crowned at his coronation in May. Conservation
experts say they're trying to clean the chair and stabilise layers of flaking
gilding. Our Royal Correspondent Nicholas Whitchell reports. It was constructed
more than 700 years ago by a craftsman called Master Walter, the painter of
Durham, on the orders of King Edward I. It was built to hold the Stone of Scone,
the ancient slab of sandstone on which Scottish kings used to be crowned. The
stone had been seized by King Edward who brought it to Westminster Abbey. The
finished chair enclosed the stone and it became the coronation chair and it's
been used at the coronation of every monarch since then. Henry VIII, Elizabeth
I, Victoria, all have sat on this ancient chair for their crowning. It was last
used, of course, at the coronation of the late Queen Elizabeth II in 1953. The
chair bears the marks of the centuries. There's graffiti from the 1800s when
visitors were able to carve their initials into it. Its original gilt finish and
vivid painted decorations have gone, but structurally it's still in Scotland.
The Abbey Conservator who's cleaning it is Christa Blesley. It's decorated with
punchwork, which is small tiny dots that we use to create images. So there's
birds, there's figures of saints and kings and because so little survives of
English art from that time, it really is an exquisite example of the quality of
craftsmanship. At some point the Stone of Scone, which was returned to Scotland
in 1996, will be brought from Edinburgh and placed underneath the chair's seat.
And then the coronation chair will take its place in front of the Abbey's high
altar for the coronation service. A service which, though it will be tailored in
some respects to reflect modern Britain, will nonetheless honour the centuries
of tradition represented by the chair, which will be its centrepiece. The
headlines again. The former Health Secretary Matt Hancock has denied claims that
in the early stages of the pandemic he rejected expert advice to give Covid
tests to everyone going into care homes in England. Police who've been searching
for the child of a couple arrested earlier this week say they've found a baby's
remains. Greece's Prime Minister has blamed what he called tragic human error
for the train crash in which at least 43 people died. BBC News. Tom Sanders was
tonight's newsreader. This is BBC Radio 4. Let's get a weather report now from
Chris Fawkes. Hello, good morning. Well Wednesday was another cloudy day across
most parts of the British Isles, but I think as we look at the forecast into
Thursday, there are better prospects of seeing the cloud break up and a bit of
sunshine coming through for some of you. Now what's going on at the moment is
we're starting to see some drier, clearer air pushing in from the near
continent, and that's moving across East Anglia, the south, middle and southern
counts of England, breaking up the cloud as it continues to push its way a
little bit further westwards. These areas turn cold overnight. There'll be a
frost around, quite widespread in the countryside, with lowest temperatures
getting down to about minus two degrees Celsius. There'll also be some clear
skies in the northwest of Scotland, could get down to about minus four in the
Highlands, but in between these areas, so for eastern and southern Scotland,
Northern Ireland, Northern England, the north, middle and Wales, there's going
to be extensive cloud around through the rest of the night, and the cloud will
continue to be thick enough to bring us some outbreaks of patchy rain and quite
persistent rain as well in places, particularly for the north-east of England.
Now that's how we start the day on Thursday, really. A swathe of cloud across
Northern England into southern eastern Scotland, still bringing some patches of
light rain from time to time, especially through the morning. Might see a few
spots getting into the north, middle and north Wales as well. To the south of
this cloudy zone, well, we've got prospects of seeing a bit more in the way of
sunshine for a time across East Anglia, the south, middle and southern Wales and
southern counties of England. Northern Ireland probably seeing some brightening
of the weather, some sunny spells here through the day, and northwest Scotland
also seeing some sunshine as well. So it's a day, a variable cloud, some
sunshine for some of you. Temperatures around eight to ten degrees, similar to
recent days, but feeling cool again in that north-easterly chilly wind. On into
Friday and Saturday, similar kind of weather days, really. Largely dry, with
some bright or sunny spells coming through the cloud. Temperatures not really
changing much, highs of around eight or nine. Darker cloud on Sunday brings some
patches of rain, but then into next week it turns colder with northerly winds
bringing some of you some snow. And that's the latest weather. Chris Fawkes,
many thanks. Now on BBC Radio 4, the book of the week. As he tours Britain's
graveyards, the writer Peter Ross confronts war, bravery and remembrance in the
company of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission. Andy Clark reads A Tomb with
a View. It's known as the Green Isle, but as the boat approached over Lost
Shield, I could see it was fringed with red. Encircled by ruins, their berries
bright in the late summer sun. The farmer put in at the stone jetty and we
walked up onto the island. This is the way the coffins come. Could one analyse a
footprint and identify grief in its tread? St Finan's Isle, or Ellen Ionin, to
give this place its formal names, would be the place to do it. We were
fortunate. Our business was not the solemn duty of a burial, and the heaviest
thing to carry was a large drum of water, for cleaning headstones. I was
accompanying Robert Ross from the Commonwealth War Graves Commission as he went
about his work. The CWGC looks after 170,000 graves in the UK. 21,000 or so are
in Scotland. Over the next five days, Robert would visit, clean and maintain 27
graves, covering Moydart, the Ardnamurchan Peninsula and the Hebridean island of
Egg. He'd make five crossings by ferry, plus short hops in a wee boat to and
from this island. One of the reasons war graves are so scattered in Scotland is
because of air crashes and ships being sunk. Casualties were buried as close as
possible to where they washed ashore. That could mean a tiny graveyard on a tiny
island. The Commonwealth War Graves Commission has to plan how to visit and mark
and then maintain that site. It's chaos colliding with order. The organisation
was established by Fabian Ware during the First World War. Ware was a former
editor of the Morning Post. Too old for active service at 45, he led a volunteer
ambulance unit in France. In October 1914, when inspecting wooden crosses in a
makeshift cemetery, he was struck by the thought of a better, more lasting way
to mark the graves of the fallen. His two central ideas were that the dead
should be treated equally, regardless of rank or station and that the headstones
should be permanent. Crucial too was his belief that bodies shouldn't be
repatriated to the countries they'd come from. They should remain buried where
they fell, beside the men they'd fought with. This was controversial.
Understandably, families very often wanted their loved ones brought home when
possible. But there was a certain poetry in it which embodied Rupert Brooke's
famous line, If I should die, think only this of me, That there's some corner of
a foreign field That is forever England. Forever Scotland too, of course, and
Wales and Australia and India and the rest. Today there are almost 1.7 million
Commonwealth War Graves and Memorials in 153 countries. They're in every
continent except Antarctica. And there are two on the Green Isle. Private Mary
MacDonald and Dougald Grant. Most members of the British Armed Forces who are
buried in the UK tend to have succumbed to their wounds after being invalided
back home, or they died from illness or accident while stationed here. Mary and
Dougald were both local to the area, from families with roots deep in Moydart,
so it would have been considered right and proper that they were buried here.
The Green Isle is an ancient Christian site. Finan, an Irish monk, is thought to
have arrived here in the 7th century. As a result, it became a holy place. It's
very small. You could walk its perimeter in 15 minutes. But you never do that.
It's too rough and boggy. Ah, here's the first one, Robert Ross said. He'd
spotted Private Mary MacDonald's grave. Mary died in 1944 at the age of 23. The
headstone is modern pink granite. I passed her former home on the drive here, a
cottage called Kincara, with smoke coming from the chimney and pieces of
driftwood woven into the fence. It was sad to think of her leaving that pretty
house, never to return. She joined the Auxiliary Territorial Service, the
women's branch of the army. How Mary lost her life on April 26th, 1944 isn't
certain, possibly tuberculosis or appendicitis while serving on an airbase. She
was the youngest of five siblings, a Gaelic speaker and reputedly a great
beauty. Her parents and brother John, all of whom she pre-deceased, share the
same grave. The desire to be laid to rest on the island isn't simply because
it's beautiful, but because it links you, body and soul, to an ancient past.
This place may have been made holy by its association with a saint, but it is,
in our time, sanctified by stories. Robert and I walked up over the top of the
island and found the second grave. Dougald Grant lies almost directly beneath a
rowan. The stone is modest, made of granite. Between carvings of an anchor and a
cross is his name, age and date of death. May 23rd, 1916. He was a deckhand with
the Royal Naval Reserve and died, aged 26, in Haslar Naval Hospital near
Portsmouth from measles and pneumonia. His body would have made its long journey
home by train from Portsmouth to Glenfinnan, where the coffin was loaded onto a
little steamer and carried up Loch Sheel. Dougald's father, Peter, was a
carpenter and made coffins. I wonder whether he made his son's. He could have
had no idea, as he shaped the wood, that a century after Dougald's death the
grave would be tended by an organisation dedicated to remembrance. I joined
Robert Ross by Grant's stone. He had scrubbed it with a stiff brush and was now
repainting the letters. I was curious about all this effort. The dead of the
World Wars died a long time ago. In many cases it's likely that no family
members visit the graves, yet the CWGC team dutifully work their way round them,
cleaning and repairing. Why go to so much trouble? We do it for the guys on the
ground, he said. You want to pay your respects. Being able to say to somebody,
this is your relative's grave and we've made sure you can read it and it's clean
and cared for and even if you can't come and visit, we'll still go back. That's
special. Richmond Castle, Yorkshire. May 19th, 1916. Three men are in the cell
block. They're singing a hymn. One was a footballer and a counts clerk, the
second a miner, the third a teacher and lay preacher. They're all prisoners now.
Norman Goddy, Alfred Myers, John Hubert Brocklesby, known as Bert. They and
thirteen of their fellows will come to be known as the Richmond Sixteen. They're
conscientious objectors. Conchies. Cowards to many. They will not fight and they
won't do any sort of work that helps the fight. They're absolutists. For this,
they've lost their freedom. Approximately 16,300 men expressed a conscientious
objection to fighting in the First World War. 1,300 of them were absolutists.
The group imprisoned at Richmond Castle were a mix of socialists and committed
Christians. How to keep their spirits up? By singing and playing chess through a
small hole between two cells. They also wrote on the walls, we know this because
the writing is still there. The prison block is attached to the keep. There are
eight solitary confinement cells over two storeys, each about nine feet long by
six wide. Inside the air smells of damp. Graffiti was everywhere. Written in
pencil. Bible verses, sketches of loved ones, lines from Tennyson, a little
pornography, scenes from war. There are more than 2,300 inscriptions dating from
the 19th century to around 1970. The best of it is by the conscientious
objectors. The only war worth fighting is the class war. You might just as well
try to dry a floor by throwing water on it as try to end this war by fighting.
On May 29th, the group left Richmond Castle for Laivre and Boulogne, singing
hymns. They knew they might be going to their deaths. The execution of the
Richmond 16 would surely serve as a deterrent for those who thought to avoid
combat. Among their number was Alfred Martlew. He worked as a clerk at the
Roundtree Chocolate Factory in York and was a member of the Independent Labour
Party. His pacifism was rooted in socialism. He believed, he said, in the
brotherhood of man. Before visiting Richmond, I'd made contact with a relation
of Alfred, his second cousin, the Reverend Andrew Martlew, who's a former
British Army chaplain. He first visited the castle in 2003, shortly before
deploying to Iraq. I went there in uniform and blagged my way into the cells, he
recalled. I found it very moving indeed. Growing up, he hadn't known anything
about the Conchie and the family, but he came to admire his relation and the
other men who refused to serve. They were all incredibly brave, he said. I can't
imagine the social pressure they were all under. There was no street in this
country where there wasn't somebody who'd lost a son or a brother or a father.
In France, Alfred and the others were court-martialed and sentenced to death,
but the sentences were commuted to ten years in prison with hard labour. The
Prime Minister, Herbert Asquith, never comfortable with conscription in the
first place, was unwilling to have his government sanction these executions.
There was, however, a feeling that the men shouldn't escape entirely. Suffering
was in the air, and why should they not breathe it? So at the end of August
1916, Alfred Martlew, along with other Conchie and his objectors, was sent to
work in a granite quarry at Dice, near Aberdeen. They slept in tents and worked
breaking rocks. One young man died of pneumonia. A group photograph taken in the
quarry is a portrait of exhaustion. Martlew is standing at the back, looking
thin, tired and cold. It's possible to feel sympathy for these outcasts while
acknowledging the greater hardships experienced by those who went to fight.
Though the Flanders trenches were hell, the work camp sounds a sort of
purgatory. When it closed at the end of October, Martlew was given other
employment, but he became upset that the jobs he was being told to do had a
military purpose. Feeling that the government had betrayed him, he went on the
run. Back in York, where he'd lived and worked, he told his fiancée Annie that
he was going to give himself up as a deserter. In a state of some distress, he
gave her his money and watch. He was last seen alive on July 4th, 1917. Seven
days later, the body of an unknown man was recovered from the River Ouse, near
Bishopthorpe Palace. Alfred was identified the following day. He was twenty-two.
He lies in the churchyard of St Andrew's, Bishopthorpe, North Yorkshire, near
the foot of a young oak. Placed on the earth by his headstone was a small wooden
cross. His blood was shed as a result of the war, and his courage, though not
the sort recognised in silences and gun salutes, was real. Age has not worried
Alfred, and the years have not condemned him. Quite the opposite. Almost a
century after his passing, he seemed strong and admirable. Was he a hero? His
relative Andrew is sure. Yes, he said, undoubtedly, without any qualification,
yes, because his sort of courage required in the cold light of day and in the
dark hours of the night that you do what you think is right. Alfred Markloo left
no mark on the walls of his Richmond castle cell. I did, however, have a copy of
his official notice of appeal, where he had set down why he would neither fight
nor do any work that would assist the fighting. His final words were written in
a neat, steady hand. I am prepared to be myself sacrificed rather than be the
means of sacrificing others. Andy Clarke was reading A Tomb with a View by Peter
Ross. The book was bridged by Anna Magnusson, and the producer is Ailey
Macready. Let's go sailing by. Now on BBC Radio 4, time for the Shipping
Forecast, issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard
Agency, at 0015, on Thursday, 2 March. The general synopsis at 1800, High Faroes
1040, Expected Hebrides 1033, by 1800 Thursday. The area forecasts for the next
24 hours. Viking Northwest-Northwitzerra. Northeasterly 4 to 6, backing
Northwesterly 3 or 4, fair, good. Southeast-Northwitzerra. Southwitzerra. East
Forties. Variable 3 or less, becoming Northwesterly 4 or 5, occasionally 6, in
Southwitzerra, fair, good. West Forties. Cromarty 4th. Northeasterly 3 to 5,
backing Northerly 2 or 3, showers at first, good. Green Dogger. East or
Northeast becoming variable, then North or Northeast 2 to 4, showers at first,
good. Fisher. Variable 3 or less, becoming Northwest 4 to 6, fair, good. German
Bight. East or Northeast 2 to 4, backing North or Northwest 3 to 5 later, fog
patches, moderate or good, occasionally very poor. Humber. East backing
Northeast 3 to 5, fair, good. Thames-Dover-White. Northeast 4 or 5, occasionally
6 later, fair, good. Portland-Plymouth. Northeast 3 to 5, showers at first,
good, occasionally moderate at first. Biscay. North or Northeast 3 or 4,
showers, good, occasionally moderate. East Trafalgar. Northeasterly or
Northwesterly 3 or 4, becoming variable 4 or less, rain, good, occasionally
moderate. West Trafalgar. Southerly or Southeasterly 3 to 5, becoming variable 4
or less, rain, good, occasionally moderate. Fitzroy-Soul. Easterly or
Northeasterly, but Southeasterly in West 3 to 5, occasionally 2 later, showers,
good. Lundy-Faasnet. Northeast veering East for a time 3 or 4, occasionally 5 at
first, showers at first, good. Irish Sea. Northeast 4 or 5, veering East 2 to 4,
showers at first, good. Shannon-Rocall. East or Southeast 3 or 4, occasionally 5
at first, showers, good. Fallon-Haberdas. East or Northeast 3 or 4, becoming
variable 3 or less, showers, good. Bailey. East or Southeast 2 to 4, becoming
variable 4 or less, showers, good. Farrell. Northeast 3 to 5, becoming variable
4 or less, fair, good. Faroes, variable 4 or less, becoming West 3 to 5 later,
fair, good. South-East Iceland. Westerly or Southwesterly 4 to 6, but variable 3
or less for a time in South-East, showers, good. Now the weather reports from
Coastal Stations for 2300. diary automatic Northeast by East 3, 24 miles, 1035,
falling slowly. Stonaway East Northeast 3, 9 miles, 1036, now rising. Lerwick
Northeast by North 3, 12 miles, 1035, falling slowly. dynamic automatic
Northeast by East 3, 6 miles, 1035, falling slowly. Aberdeen North Northwest 3,
9 miles, 1034, falling slowly. Lucas Northeast by North 3, 13 miles, 1033, now
rising. Puma North Northeast 4, 1031, falling slowly. Burlington Northeast 3,
1028, steady. Sandetti Light Vessel Automatic East Northeast 5, 11 miles, 1025.
Greenwich Light Vessel Automatic Northeast 5, 5 miles, 1024. St. Catharines
Point Automatic Northeast by East 3, 1025, rising slowly. Jazzy Northeast by
East 3, 14 miles, 1024, rising slowly. Channel Light Vessel Automatic East by
North 5, 1024. Silly Automatic Northeast by East 4, 22 miles, 1026, falling more
slowly. Milford Haven Northeast 2, 35 miles, 1027, now rising. Aberporth
Northeast by North 4, recent precipitation, 24 miles, 1027, falling slowly.
Valley Northeast by North 4, recent rain, 15 miles, 1029, falling slowly.
Liverpool Crosby Northeast by North 3, 8 miles, 1029, falling slowly. Valencia
East by North 2, 27 miles, 1030, falling slowly. Ronald's Way Northeast by North
4, 1030, falling slowly. Marlin Head Northeast by North 4, 24 miles, 1033,
falling slowly. McRae-Hannish Automatic North by East 2, more than 38 miles,
1033, falling slowly. Here's the weather forecast for the inshore waters of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, valid for the following 24 hours, issued by
the Met Office at 2300 on Wednesday, 1st March. General situation, high
pressure, will persist to the northwest of the UK during the next couple of
days, maintaining light, mainly northeasterly winds, across the coastal waters,
but strong at times in the far southeast. From Cape Wrath to Ratchray Head,
including Orkney, Northeast 304, becoming variable 3 or less later, mainly fair,
good. Ratchray Head to Barriecoupen Tweed, Northeast 405, backing North 304
later, showers, good. Barriecoupen Tweed to Whitby, Northeast 4, becoming
variable 3 or less, showers, fair later, good. Whitby to Gibraltar Point, East
or Northeast 2 to 4, showers at first, good. Gibraltar Point to North Foreland,
Northeasterly 3 to 5, occasionally 6 later near North Foreland, fair, good.
North Foreland to Salisbury Hill, Northeasterly 4 or 5, occasionally 6 later,
fair, good. Salisbury Hill to Lyme Regis, Northeast 3 to 5, showers at first,
good. Lyme Regis to Land's End, including the Isles of Scilly, Northeast 3 to 5,
showers at first, good. Land's End to St David's Head, including the Bristol
Channel, Northeast 3 to 5, veering east, backing northeast later, 3 or 4,
showers at first, good. St David's Head to Great Ormhead, including St George's
Channel, Northeast 4 or 5, veering east 2 to 4, showers at first, good. Great
Ormhead to the Mud of Galloway, Northeast 4 or 5, veering east 2 to 4, showers,
fair later, good. Isle of Man, Northeast 5, veering east 2 to 4, showers, fair
later, good. Lough Fulte to Carlingford Lough, Northeasterly 4, occasionally 5
in south, veering easterly 2 to 4, showers, good. Mud of Galloway to Mud of
Kintyre, including the Firth of Clyde and North Channel, Northeasterly 3 or 4,
occasionally 5 near Mud of Galloway, veering easterly 2 to 4, showers, good. Mud
of Kintyre to Arden American Point, east or northeast 3 or 4, occasionally 2
later, mainly fair, good. Arden American Point to Cape Wrath, east or northeast
2 to 4, becoming variable 3 or less, fair, good. Shetland Isles, northeast 4 or
5, becoming variable 3 or less, then northwest 3 or 4 later, fair, good. And
that completes the Shipping Bulletin. And that's all from us here at BBC Radio 4
for tonight. We'll be joining our colleagues over at the BBC World Service in
just a moment. Until next time, I am Neil Nunes, thanks for your company, here's
wishing you a very good night..