TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. BBC News
at 7 o'clock The Prime Minister Rishi Sunak will meet the President of the
European Commission Ursula von der Leyen in Bancsher tomorrow. A joint statement
said they would work towards finding a solution to the dispute on post-Brexit
trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. Our Brussels correspondent Jessica
Parkers says the announcement signifies a potential breakthrough in
negotiations. It was always the plan I'd heard in recent weeks that once they
got to a point that they could sign off on a deal, Ursula von der Leyen would go
to London or somewhere in the UK to meet with Rishi Sunak and that would be the
moment. They're not saying in that joint statement that a deal has been done,
but I think it would be pretty strange if they were to announce her travel plans
to head to the UK tomorrow and that at this time tomorrow we're not talking
about some kind of very significant announcement. Nearly 60 people, including at
least 12 children, are known to have drowned after a boat-carrying migrant sank
off the coast of southern Italy. It's feared the casualty figure could rise as
it's not clear how many people were on the vessel. Those on the boat included
people from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Somalia. A 14-year-old boy has been
charged with a number of driving offences after a car crashed into a house in
Derby. Police say the VW Charan had been taken from a nearby property shortly
before the incident. The boy who can't be named for legal reasons will appear in
court tomorrow. High-level talks between Israeli and Palestinian officials in
Jordan have ended with the commitment to de-escalate further violence. It was
the first such meeting for years. The talks coincided with the shooting of two
Israelis in the occupied West Bank. Rugby Union in Scotland's hopes of a grand
slam in the Six Nations are over after a 31-21 defeat by France in Paris.
Scotland have been unbeaten going into the match. And in football, Manchester
United have claimed the first piece of silverware available this season with a
2-0 victory over Newcastle in the EFL Cup Final. Newcastle's 54-year wait for a
major trophy continues. BBC News. On BBC Radio 4... We are all a unique
accumulation of our own unique experiences and knowledge. The poet Lem Sisay
looks at uniqueness. Rainfall, like applause, is utterly unique every time it
happens. Reflecting on the occasions he's stood out. In a room full of
graduates, people without degrees can sometimes get defensive about it. Not me!
Lem Sisay is the one and only... He'll like an all. Starting this Friday morning
at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. In 15 minutes, Steph McGovern's guests are
the comedians Amy Gladhill and Andrew Maxwell seeking to offer definitive
answers to the great questions of our age. Or perhaps not. The ultimate choice
is at a quarter past seven. Based on Radio 4, if you've got a bit of time on
your hands, lower Locksley's looking for volunteers. It's the archers. What do
you think? It's a bit close to the one of the Arboretum. How about here? Oh
that's better. What's going on? Oh hey, not a tanto. It's for our volunteer
recruitment day. You're what? I did tell you about it. Did you? Yeah, last week.
Not everyone's as obsessed with this as you are, Freddie. Haven't you come to
give us some moral support? I was just hoping we could hang out. Oh, is it all
getting a bit much in Cambridge? No, Lily, I wouldn't say that. But I was ready
for a change of scene. Perhaps we could do that some other day. How long are you
staying? I'm back on the 10th. When's that? Week Friday. That's as much
compassionate leave as I could get. Then the house hunt starts. Well, flat hunt
probably. Not planning to stay on with your dad and see both. No way. I mean,
when you've been used to having your own place. So you'll have some time after
the funeral? It might be a bit less stressed then. Maybe. Have you seen much of
your granddad? Not a lot. Everyone's pretty worried about him. Alice is going to
take special care of him on the day. Oh, good idea. Poor Brian. So how's this
recruitment thing going to work? Ah, well, it's a drop-in day. Anyone who's
interested can find out what volunteering at Lower Locksley entails. From you
guys? And Cliff and Diane. Yeah, two of our longest-serving volunteers. They'll
be here any minute. They can explain what it's like being part of the team.
Sounds good. Ah, but I have a cunning plan. The people coming might not realise,
but we'll also be looking at them to assess how suitable they are. I guess you
can't just have anybody representing the place. Well, not everyone's in the
front line. There are different sorts of roles. Yeah, so if someone seems
promising but shy, we can find them something behind the scenes. Or if they're
confident and have good people skills... Then they can fill a public-facing
role, like tour guide. Oh, is this your first customer? No. Hello, Cliff. Thank
you for coming. Oh, my pleasure. I'll do one. You can hang your things up on the
coat rail. So what does he do? Self-appointed chief tour guide. We're especially
on the lookout for more guides. Like Cliff? No, no, no, no. Not like Cliff. He's
only doing this because I can't get rid of it. He knows his Lower Locksley
history, though. Yeah, because he's seen most of it first-hand. That's a bit
unfair. The trouble is, he's been here so long, he thinks there's only one way
of doing things. That's why I'm looking for younger volunteers. Freddie had a
rather challenging encounter with him the other week. Most of our guides are
pretty ancient. I wouldn't say ancient. No wonder young people stare away from
the house in droves. I thought you got plenty of families visiting. Yeah, for
the rare breeds of the treetop walk. But the house is the core of what Lower
Locksley has to offer. I want it to be for everyone. We have plenty of school
parties coming round. Yeah, and who are they faced with? One foot in the grave
over there. You think they might relate better to someone younger? They're bound
to, aren't they? What's he doing now? What does it look like? Don't you provide
your guys with hot drinks? Of course. Cliff always likes to bring his own flask.
Probably got his medication in it. What I've been trying to explain to Freddie
is that older people are more likely to be available. If they're retired, you
mean? And the guides have to have a genuine interest in history. Actually, uh,
Nolotando, maybe you could help with that. Me? Well, you're a history teacher.
You could help screen the hopefuls. What? Set an exam? No, no, just have a
friendly chat. One historian to another. Would that be all right? Totally. Mum
made me head of volunteering. A temporary volunteer coordinator. Whatever. The
point is, I'm in charge. So, yes, it would be a huge help. Well, to be fair, it
doesn't sound like you've got much else on today. That's true. All right, then.
Excellent. Time to find some fresh blood. What you said in your sermon about
giving things up for Lent? Yes. You've got me thinking, Alan. In the olden days.
Olden days? I mean, before I was baptized. All right. When I gave things up,
like, I don't know, chocolate or booze, the fact that it was Lent, it didn't
really mean anything. It was just another month, like dry January. So, things
are different now. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's got a lot more significance. I'm not
just doing it for myself. That's great, Harrison. So, what have you given up?
Being a slave to work. Interesting. Well, particularly since I got promoted,
it's just taken over more and more of my life. It's just... It's one of those
jobs where there's always something extra. You can be doing it. Well, you do
very important work. But the more I give to the job, the less I've got for other
people. The last few months, all I seem to do is graft, come home and fall
asleep in front of the telly. Oh, you sang in Fallon's choir at Christmas,
didn't you? Well, by the skin of my teeth, we had to cancel stuff with my mum
and dad so I could. And even then, I couldn't get to all the rehearsals. And you
have kindly agreed to re-hang the curtain in the Lady Chapel? Oh, that's a ten-
minute job. I'll come back later with me too, Will. Thank you. No, it's... It's
more... I've seen how much Fallon gets out of organising these village events,
so I'm going to see if there's something I can get involved in. Ah, sorry to
interrupt. Oh, of course, all right, Neil. I just wanted to check, Harrison, if
you might be available for ringing on Friday. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I'm
going to the funeral anyway. Oh, I thought you might. I'd like to do Grand-Sire
Triples to mark Jennifer's passing, so it'd be good to have a full tower. I know
I haven't been a very loyal ringer lately. Oh, that's all right. I was just
saying I'm trying to rebalance my life. I'd like to do a bit more for the
community. Oh, wow. Have you considered volunteering at Lower Loxley? Oh.
They've got a recruitment day on today. Well, then... Thought I might go along,
see what's what. Right. Details are on their website, if you fancy it. OK. So,
anyway, I'll see you Friday, if not before. Definitely, thanks, Neil. Bye, then.
Bye-bye, Neil. Bye. So, are you going to follow in Neil's footsteps? It's not
really the sort of thing I had in mind. No. But with Easter coming up and the
coronation, there must be something I can get involved in, or even take charge
of. I'm sure there will be, Harrison. Yeah. Now, then, if you're not rushing off
to Lower Loxley, as you know, we've stopped putting out biscuits because of
Lent, but we can still offer coffee and conversation. Yeah? Well, ever since I
stopped being chair of the parish council, I suppose, I've been looking for
another way I could give something back. Hmm. That's really interesting, Neil.
So, you feel that being a volunteer here would be giving back? Well, it's part
of our heritage, isn't it? Can't be easy. Keep it a place like this going.
Believe me, it isn't. Is it, Freddie? I mean, we manage. So, if I can help in
some small way. Oh, very good. Um, not a tandem? Oh, I don't think we need to
bother. Yes, Neil. Um, when you say heritage, is that something you're
interested in? Well, yeah, I'd say so, yeah. And how do you pursue this
interest? Well, I've lost count of the times I must have visited this place, and
I like to read about local history. Excellent. Like, you know that book your
grandma wrote with John Trigore and Cambridge and English Village through the
ages? Do you know it? Of course. It's very good. In part. I will challenge some
of the assumptions, though. Really? In what way? The chapter on the Civil War.
We don't really want to take up any more of Neil's time, though, do we? And what
other experience could you bring to the role? Well, plenty. 26 years on the
parish council. I'm a church warden and tower captain, of course. Sorry? Bell
ringing. Oh. And I'm in a management position at Berrofar. But you've no direct
experience of, say, talking to school parties, though, do you? Well, no, not a
search, but I've had kids of my own and I've got grandkids. It wouldn't frighten
me. Of course it wouldn't. Did you have any more questions, Neil? No, no, no.
You've given me quite a grilling, I must say. In that case, I'm sure we'll be in
touch about the next stage. Oh, OK. Well, that'd be great. Thanks, all. No,
thank you. Bye, Neil. Yeah, bye. See you. Who says we're going to be in touch?
You'd be mad not to. Neil's a lovely man. Good with people. And he'd obviously
take the job very seriously. Yeah, but he'd be just the same as all our other
volunteers. If we want to attract a wider range of visitors, we really need to
find a few guides below bus pass age. But is Lily's stead, availability's an
issue? Maybe. But we're not going to revitalise Lower Locksley if we just
recruit more clones of Diane and Cliff. Beggars can't be tutors, Freddie. Can I
remind you, we've been here for two hours and we've had interest from precisely
one person. Everyone seems to be planning to come on Friday. Yes. Well, that's a
good thing, isn't it? Oh, no, absolutely. It's really rather silly, but... What?
I can't help feeling a little nervous about it. You? You must have done hundreds
of funerals. Oh, well, I have. This one does feel a bit different, though. How
so? Well, there's always an extra dimension when it's someone who's been a
friend. Oh, I can see that. No, there are times where I just like to be in the
congregation, paying my respects. Sure. Especially since I lost my first wife. I
do feel for Brian. That's only natural. Of course there's also been tension
between me and the Aldridges over this proposed window. I had heard something.
And not that long ago, Kate was threatening to report me to the bishop when I
lost my rag about Chris and Amy. I remember that. Yeah. I hate to imagine her
reaction if I mess something up. You won't, though, surely. Well, I was being
known, Harrison. I once got the name of the deceased wrong. No. Yeah. Her name
was Annabelle, and I called her Jezebel. Oh, Alan, how did that happen? No idea.
It just slipped out. Jezebel, of all names. Oh, no. See, funerals are a day that
families never forget. I really have to get this one right. Cheer up, Freddy. It
was worth a try. It didn't really go as I'd hoped. You had a few people through.
A handful, Nolatando. I thought I'd be, you know, picking the cream of the crop.
Yes. The slow button seemed quite keen on helping in the office, and you've got
two good contenders for public roles. Oh, you can't be serious. Oliver's even
older than Cliff. Where's my fresh blood? If you're that bothered, you could try
a different approach. Like what? I don't know. A social media campaign? Hand out
flyers and nightclubs. Do a stunt on TikTok. You're being silly now. Or you
could just accept, that's the way things are. No. If I'm going to prove myself
to mum, I can't just recruit a couple more wrinklies. Oh, splendid. Oh, like I
said, 10 minute, Joe, I'm very grateful. You know, Alan, I was thinking on what
you were saying earlier. About? I mean, you've got personal feelings, but you've
also got a job to do. Oh, must be quite a familiar experience for a police
officer. More often than I'd like to admit. When I'm raging inside of what
someone's done, but I've got to follow procedure. And you can't let the emotion
detract from what you're there to do. Yeah. The best thing I can do in that
moment for everyone involved is just, and it's a big just, do my job.
Absolutely. Obviously Friday's going to be a big occasion, but if the old ridges
felt awkward, they wouldn't have asked you to do the service, would they? Good
point. I think you could relax about it. I'll try to remember that. At the end
of the day, though, it's not about me, is it? No. It's about Jennifer and the
people she's left behind. Well, a baptism of fire awaits Ben when we return to
Ambridge tomorrow evening at seven. And then, of course, at 7.15. Discover the
very best in arts and culture with Front Row. I love when the theatre becomes
absolutely silent and they're like, what's happening? With live discussions,
news and reviews. It was extraordinary. I got very moved. And interviews with
the people creating and changing the world of arts around us. I pay a lot of
attention to lessons in the human condition that never cease to inspire me. Join
Tom Sutcliffe and me, Samira Ahmed, for Front Row. Some of the lines that I
write, I personally do actually really love. Live every Monday to Thursday
evening on Radio 4 at 7.15 with thousands of episodes now on BBC Sounds. Comedy
now on Radio 4 as Steph McGovern plays ringmaster for the panel show with the
silliest arguments you'll hear all week. Or at least we hope so. It's time for
The Ultimate Choice. Hello, I'm Steph McGovern and welcome to The Ultimate
Choice, the show that confronts celebrities with dastardly dilemmas, curious
catch-22s and unhinged ultimatums. Joining me tonight are two top comedians.
It's Andrew Maxwell and Amy Gledhill. So tonight we are taking your life out of
your hands. We're going to be playing a souped-up game of Would You Rather. I'll
present each of our guests with a devious scenario that rests on one simple
choice. But Andrew and Amy won't be choosing the outcome. Oh no, our wonderful
studio audience will weigh up the pros and cons of both sides and with some help
from real-life experts ultimately decide on our poet celebrity's fates. That's
right, the audience will be pulling the strings with all the skill of Geppetto
after one too many Jagerbums. OK, let's get straight down to it with round one.
Our first dilemma is one that's going to impact Andrew. Here is the scenario. So
it's always been your dream to be a head teacher. It seems like who wants to be
a millionaire and then give him a kiss. It's great that we can laugh about
coughing indoors again. Here we go. It's always been your dream to be a head
teacher. It's the culmination of a career in education and the extra money won't
hurt right now either. You go for interviews and two prestigious institutions
come back with offers. You'll have responsibility for designing the curriculum,
balancing budgets, keeping students in line and everything else in between. The
schools in question, Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry or Grange Hill.
Which job do you take? Well, I mean, they're both a bit magical, aren't they?
Yep. They've both got the fantasy element to them. Hogwarts is obviously a
magical school where young little wizards learn how to be big wizards. And if I
remember Grange Hill correctly, Zamo used to chase a dragon. So what's your
instinct telling you? Well, the question is, what's the question telling you?
Well, the Grange Hill gig's going to be harder, but I hate posh kids, so I'll go
with Grange Hill. Okie dokie. Amy, what are you thinking? Well, my first thought
with Hogwarts is that there's a lot of stairs. There's so many stairs. You never
see a lift. You never see an escalator. Do you know what I mean? And that sort
of puts me up where it's Grange Hill, you know where you are. It's flat. Shall
we talk through some of the pros of Hogwarts then? Yeah. So they've got much
better facilities than Grange Hill. Oh, yeah. Quidditch pitch. You get your own
owl? Yeah. You do, but owls aren't easy to deal with. Do you have experience? I
have. A man, I was hungover in a pub in Kerry once, and a man walked in with an
owl. And I was a bit hungover on, hey, there's an owl. And he went, yeah, it's
all yours. And he just left it on my arm and left the boat. I spent the rest of
the evening with an owl on my arm. And it didn't have the gauntlet or any of the
equipment. Just a man and a teacher. So you would fit right in then at Hogwarts?
I suppose I'd certainly work in the avian department. Yeah. What about all the
magic at your disposal as well? You know, if you've got a pushy pair and you've
got to deal with our offstead coming up, you'll be just like, expelliarmus. Oh,
yeah. Well, that's the thing. Why don't they all just do magic all the time? To
make everything good all the time. Because then there'd be no storyline? Oh,
yeah. No, you have got a point there. But I'd say, yeah, I think the magic is
quite cool. I'd say another pro is the capes. Yeah. Because as a lady with a
larger chest, let me tell you, shirts are difficult to button. And in Grangell,
I feel like I would have to wear a shirt, whereas a cape, it ties around the
neck, it's free. So you're not going to wear a shirt? A cape, it ties around the
neck, it's free. Flowing. I can wear what I want. You know, it's practical, it's
stylish, and it's inclusive for all body shapes. There's a good curriculum as
well, you know, herbology, divination. Oh, it's a fabulous curriculum they have,
because they're training people to be wizards, you see. And by that I mean civil
servants. Which, you know, to actually get any legislation enacted in this
country is magic. Yeah. So that's what they're training. Whereas Grangell, hmm,
van drivers, really. Do you know what I mean? Nothing wrong with van drivers.
No, no. No, listen, it's not my country, it's your class issue. Not mine. Not
mine. You turn his life around. And now he's vaping and driving a van. That's
magic, that's magic. I love that. That's real magic. The start of the question
was, Andrew really wants to be a head teacher. Shall we talk about Grangell
then? Please. Look, the pro's there. There's a social element to it. You'll be
potentially... I'd be mixing with my own kind. Yeah. I'd never need to call a
dealer again. Just, it's Wednesday, it's time to start confiscating. I wonder
what our audience think on this. Does anyone want to tell me their thoughts?
Yeah, I'd say Hogwarts, because I think that was the school that has the
greatest chance of claiming independent, grammar, private school status. And as
a result, you could then get charity status and use that as a massive tax
fiddle. And that's on next April, I believe. You could then improve your cash
flow by 20% by charging VAT. APPLAUSE Wow. I'm sure you are forming a view now
as to which school? You're going to send Andrew to run. But before you make your
verdict, let's hear from an expert on the matter. Veneta Spence is principal of
May Park Primary in Bristol, and this is what she thinks. The pros of Hogwarts,
those lesson observations are going to be a lot of fun. I think the staff room
chat will be interesting, what they got up onto the weekend, how they get into
grips with the new curriculum. I think how to manage the Ministry of Magic will
be a challenge. I think the parents will be a challenge, especially those old
established families. As a new head, they're going to be seeing how they're
going to push me into doing what they want me to do. Establishing my own
authority will be difficult. But I think the children will be fun. They'll
undercut all of that. Oh, maintenance, what a nightmare. Honestly, that heating
bill will be absolutely catastrophic. And those feasts will have to have some
serious words about how we pay for those free school dinners, because they are
seriously epic, you know. Pros of Grange Hill, definitely the children, because
they're going to have something about them, aren't they? There's going to be
some grit there. No two days will be the same. But I think also the staff,
everyone's going to be there for the kids, like a kind of mass staffing
movement, because it's going to be too gritty to just be there just for jokes.
The parents, I think the parents could be a bit of a con, but a bit of a pro.
They are going to come up on a day, shout through the gates, about how rubbish
you are, and then it's going to turn into something amazing and pretty beautiful
after once you've done the work. So I think that's pretty good. When you're
weighing it up, the children, the staff, the parents are going to be a pro at
Grange Hill, yeah. So given everything you've heard, where are you swaying?
Well, I don't really like it in the Highlands of Scotland. It's very cold in the
winter and there's midgies in the summer. Whereas Grange Hill is just... Ilford.
So I'll go for Ilford because it shuts off the M11. Yeah. North Circular. If you
hate it, you can leave really quickly. Which, by the way, is the actual town
slogan of Ilford? It's not you deciding, though. It's our studio audience. So if
you want to send Andrew to Grange Hill, give us a cheer. If you want to send him
to Hogwarts, make yourself known. I see what's happening here. Will I accept
your challenge? Yep, there we have it. The audience have spoken in this
scenario. Andrew is off to Hogwarts, where he'll try and get the young kids
interested in the powers of herbology. And try and get the teenagers a bit less
interested in the powers of herbology. Right, it's time for round two. Amy, it's
your turn and remember, the audience have your fate in their hands. So you've
been feeling poorly for weeks now. You decide it's time to see a doctor and get
your symptoms checked out. But the waiting list at your local GP surgery is
absolutely massive. After a little online research, you discover that two well-
known doctors are offering free private consultations in your area. But which
medical man do you go for? Dr Hannibal Lecter. Oh, the love doctor himself,
Barry White. What are you thinking? Oh, there'd be two very different
appointments, wouldn't there? Erm, do you know what? Hannibal Lecter is smart,
isn't he? Yeah. Like, he does know his stuff. And I went to the doctor's
recently, it was a nurse appointment, and I don't think she was a nurse and it
sort of freaked me out a bit. What was she... I think she was a practical joker.
I was just... I went for a smear test and she said she couldn't get it. She said
it's too cold, so she made me stand up. And I kid you not, jump up and down...
No! Rubbing my tummy and coughing. And I was doing it, because I'll do what
anyone tells me to do. And then I got on the bed and she just did it really easy
and I was thinking, that was a joke, wasn't it? There's no way that's real. That
must be a distraction technique or something. Were you nervous? No, it wasn't
till I was jumping up and down with that. So who would you pick, then? Hannibal
Lecter. Hannibal Lecter, because I feel like he might... He's the most closest
thing to a medical professional. Mm! I think I would also go Lecter, because...
What's a doctor there for? They're either giving you pills or bad news. So, you
probably want bad news from Hannibal Lecter. You know what I mean? The bad news
might be he's going to eat you, though. I think it's probably inevitable. You
wouldn't want bad news from Barry White, would you? I disagree. I would
absolutely love some bad news from Barry White. Oh, baby. You don't need to plan
for next Christmas. Ooh! How do you do that? Get your will ready. OK. I'd be
jumping up and down with that. I'm telling me to. Which cat charity are you
going to leave it on? So you wouldn't be bothered that he had zero medical
training, then? Oh, no, I've sort of swung completely the other way now. No, I'd
be quite happy. I think I just want to have a nice time. I think that's what I'm
looking for in my GP appointment. I just want a nice day out, you know. That's
true. Don't you think he might exacerbate your symptoms as well, you know? Make
you go weak at the knees, erasing heart? Oh, yeah. Give you a feeling deep
inside. I am feeling quite warm just thinking about it. There was a genuinely
late 70s in America, there was a birth rate spike. And the American government
sent a committee hearing, put forward evidence for the birth rate, taking up as
the music of Barry White. No way. Genuinely. His bedside man is going to be
good. Yeah. I'm happy with that. I think he's going to have warm hands, which
I'm happy with. It would be relaxing. Do you know, the more I'm thinking about
it, the more I just... This is exactly what I want. I want just a lovely
consultation with a kind, sexy man who with a deep voice and a warm hand, who
tells me everything's going to be OK. Thank you. I agree. Thank you very much. I
think that's what we all want to detail. Shall we look at Hannibal Lecter a bit
more, then? So Hannibal is more of a mix bag. Yeah. I mean, he is a world-
renowned clinical psychiatrist, isn't he? That's a plus. Experience surgeon.
Another plus. Yeah. He's a good listener who notices everything. Tick. Tick.
Yeah. He's got a maze of memory, so he's not going to have to go through your
notes. Oh. Trying to work out, you know, when you're last in. That is good. That
is good. On the downside, he does eat people. But not loads and loads of people.
Ah, you're right. You're right. He is picky. He's picky. He's not going to want
me. He's going to have a load. He can do better for his sandwiches. I think I'd
feel quite safe going to him. Shall we find out what our audience think, then?
My real concern, with Barry Wright, is about the waiting lists. So I'm really
concerned that I could be the first, but I also could be the last. Oh! APPLAUSE
Well done. That was my everything. Aww! Does anybody else want to give us their
thoughts, then? I actually think you'd probably give Lecter a bit of a miss
there, though, because the dietary recommendations would only ever be liver and
beans together. Might want some green veg in there for a bit more balance, just
as you. True. Very true. What a nice key, Andy. Yes! Oh, that's a blind. Right,
let's hear it from a real-life doctor. Sonia Adasara is a NHS doctor, and she
had this to say. I think there is a good chance that you may get a bad service
from both of these doctors. I think it depends on what condition are you worried
about? If you've got problems with maybe anxiety or stress, then maybe the love
doctor might be a bit better, because his soothing voice may help you get
better, and maybe going to Dr Hannibal, you know, the risk of him maybe eating
you might make your mental health issues worse, or might make your stress a bit
worse. If, though, yet say you had a health problem that you thought was life
threatening, that you thought could actually kill you, then even though the love
doctor may be able to make you feel better with his soothing, beautiful voice,
he can't actually give you any medicine. So at that point, maybe going to Dr
Hannibal Lecter, given that he is an actual doctor, he had his medical training,
he's got qualifications, he could write you some prescriptions, he could save
your life, that might be better. And if your illness is going to, you know, kill
you anyways, then the risk of death may be, you know, less stressful. Also, what
type of patient are you, what type of doctor do you want? So in my experience,
some patients really like the stern, scary, old man telling you off type of
doctor to kick you in gear. If you're one of those patients that, you know, need
someone to really tell them to you need to do this, then in that case, choose Dr
Hannibal. So I think there's a lot of things to consider, and it's quite a
difficult question. I know the expert basically said, Barry's going to be
rubbish, don't go with Barry, go with the one that's got the medical license and
can give you actual medication and save your life. But come on, it's Barry.
LAUGHTER Have you leaning, Andrew? Who's going to pick Hannibal Lecter over
Barry White? Well, let's find out what the audience think. It's crunch time.
Studio audience, we need you to cast your judgement if you prefer Amy to be
looked after by Dr Hannibal Lecter. Make yourselves known. CHEERING Barry White
fans, be loud and proud. CHEERING APPLAUSE Barry, Barry! There we are. Barry
White, your dreams have come true. I'm absolutely over the moon! LAUGHTER Are
you happy with that outcome? Yeah, I'm really happy. And I know this is only a
fictional thing, but I'm going to see if I can make it happen. LAUGHTER He's
going to have to be an impersonator, and it might get a bit weird, but this
is... I've just... I've realised what my fantasy in life is now, so thanks for
this. It's been a great experience. LAUGHTER Another happy customer. And that's
the end of round two! CHEERING APPLAUSE Now, up until now, our studio audience
have been making the big calls, but we can't let them off scot-free. Now, our
next question, we're going to crank the heat up on them, which is going to cost
us a fortune in the heating bill, but what the hell? This is our role. So this
time, it's not our guest whose features are on the line, it's our audience who
will face the ultimate choice. And who will choose their fate? Andrew and Amy.
You up for that? Oh, how the tables have turned! Right, so here is our third
scenario. The stresses and strains of modern life are getting on top of you. So
you sign up to a life coach service with a difference. Your life coach will make
every major life decision for you. Romantic, financial, professional, the works.
But when you turn up to your first session, you're horrified to discover the
truth. Every big call in your life is going to be made by either seven-year-old
you or extremely drunk adult you. Which do you choose? So, yeah, a battle
between two versions of yourselves. If you're anything like me, they're both
made an appearance in lockdown. But which should win out? Andrew and Amy, where
would you lean on this? It's the same person, isn't it? Yeah. Seven-year-old me
and extremely drunk adult me both think it's great to pee in the front garden.
What are you thinking, Amy? I think seven-year-old me would be quite good,
actually. I think I somehow was more equipped for life when I was seven.
Everything just seemed so simple and clear and it was just really easy. I once
went out with somebody for eight months because I agreed to go out with him when
I was drunk and didn't remember. And seven-year-old me wouldn't have gone out
with him because he wasn't that nice, you know? Seven-year-old me would have
been like, ew, gross, no. So I think seven-year-old me would be the better life
coach. There's a lot of pros, though, for the seven-year-old, isn't there? Like
you say, that hope and optimism. Hope and optimism. Yeah. Also, your big
problems matter less. Like, you're not going to care about inflation because you
can do a cartwheel. That is really true. And I think it'd give you an
interesting diet. Yeah, I mean, I don't know if that's a pro or not. Well, I
think... So, seven-year-old me would definitely have, like, ice cream for
breakfast. Fine. Drunk me puts pizzas in the oven and then falls asleep. OK. So
I think seven-year-old me actually is winning that one. Well, I know. You get
drunk and put a pizza in the oven. You wake up, you're surrounded by men in
uniform saving your life. Oh! It's pretty good. If one of them's Barry White,
she'll be happy. Oh, who wouldn't like to see Barry White go down a fireman's
pole? Slowly or very fast. How does physics work? I guess the bad thing, though,
is you'll probably have unrealistic job expectations, you know? Yeah. I really
wanted to be a vet when I was little, but I'm allergic to all animals and quite
scared of them as well. So, yeah, maybe not. What did you want to be when you
were seven? Can you remember? I wonder if you're boxing heavyweight champion of
the world. All right, OK. And then I didn't get big enough. And I wasn't willing
to fight small men. Shall we talk about the cons of drunk you, making all your
life decisions for you, then? One of the things is the internet, you do loads of
mad buying, don't you, when you're drunk? Yeah. Yeah, according to The Sun and
The Mirror, people in 2020 admitted to getting hammered and buying things like a
soap-making business, a life-size cutout of Gemma Collins, a splinter which had
been removed from the foot of an NBA star, and an actual ambulance. So that
could happen? I've bought two mad purchases in my life. One was I bought a
convertible car when I got my first instalment of my student loan, because I
thought I was a millionaire. I've never seen that much money in my life, but I
didn't drive. And my boyfriend was furious. And the other thing I've bought
recently was a fee, but it was broken. And it said quite clearly that it was
broken, but in my head I was like, I can fix this. A broken vibration plate,
which is a thing you stand on, and it just wobbles you. But it's broken, so if
anyone wants one of them... It sounds like you get that experience when you go
for your smeared test now, isn't it? So I don't need to worry. No, I don't know.
I don't really have much on this, because the only thing I've ever bought when
I'm really drunk is more booze. I believe it's called a nightclub. Also,
relationships are easier, aren't they, when you're drunk? So those decisions are
easy. You've got your flirt on a bit more. Only if you're both drunk. Oh,
there's nothing like trying to be in a relationship with somebody who's sober.
Wait, you're not. You're not. You're in the back of the car. They're in the
front. They're a taxi driver. You're trying to form a relationship. What do our
audience think on this? What are they thinking? I can cartwheel when I'm drunk.
Ah, right. And I don't care about inflation when I'm drunk. So I just think life
would be more fun. Yeah? Seven-year-old life would be a bit flat, I think. So
just get drunk. Yeah. Yeah. And are you drunk now? No. Just checking. Anybody
else? I think drunk me because drunk me is good at pretending to be sober. Like,
if I'm going on a bus or something, I can pretend to be sober. So if I just
constantly tell drunk me that there's a bus driver in the corner or something,
then I could pretend to be sober and drunk me could make good decisions. Before
we decide what to do, let's hear from our ultimate choice expert, who in this
case is psychologist and broadcaster, Emma Kenny. As a seven-year-old, you're
very mindful of the moment, but that also means you're not necessarily thinking
consequentially. And the naivety of a seven-year-old also means that you're
entirely vulnerable. So you have to think very carefully. Do you want the joyful
experience of just believing that everybody has your best intentions at heart
and where tomorrow really doesn't matter, but committing to tasks, is unlikely
to be something that you're going to be able to stick to because, intentionally,
well, there are more fun things to do. The drunk you is far more likely to make
you do things that, yes, are impulsive, but still with the adult cognition
available to you to make sure that you don't do anything too crazy. Of course,
the problem is the drunk you might also advise you to steal a bus. And of
course, you'll probably be able to do things that are impulsive, and of course,
you'll probably wake up the next morning remembering absolutely nothing. So the
seven-year-old you or the drunk you, well, I guess that comes down to whether
you want to live in the very moment or maybe at some points just forget the
moment altogether. So that's what our psychologist, Emma, thinks. I love the
thing that first came to her head was steal a bus. Yeah. I don't think I've ever
had that thought when I think of her. Emma is great while you're on a night out.
Yeah. I bet she's amazing to go out with. Right. So it's decision time. Amy,
where are you going? It is tricky, this one, but I listen to the expert, and the
way she described being a seven-year-old and not being able to commit to a task.
I have ADHD, and it's like, that's how I live now. So I feel like a seven-year-
old is fine. I think you'll survive. You might not have a great life. Yeah. But
I think you'll get by. What do you think? I think seven-year-olds would be a
very healthy way to live. Yeah. I mean, in the end of the day, no matter what
crazy ideas they come up with, they've got to be in bed by nine o'clock. Are you
saying, Andrew, seven-year-old you is who you're deciding? Oh, definitely seven-
year-old. Right. OK, so the panel has spoken. The decision has made, studio
audience. From now on, all your major life decisions must be made by seven-year-
old you. Who's happy with that? Give us a cheer if you're happy. CHEERING AND
APPLAUSE Who thinks they've made the wrong call? CHEERING Sorry. You've got it
about right. So that brings us to the end of the show, and where are we? Andrew
is the headmaster of Hogwarts and just tried to use the staff loo straight after
Hankard. LAUGHTER Amy is off to see Dr Barry White asking why his prescription
of more love still hasn't got rid of her persistent veruca. LAUGHTER And our
audience are being controlled by their seven-year-old cells which goes some way
to explaining why the studio smells of chicken nugget farts. LAUGHTER Thanks
once again to our panellists, Andrew Maxwell and Amy Gledhill and to our
wonderful audience here in London. I've been Steph McGovern and this has been
The Ultimate Choice. Goodnight! CHEERING The Ultimate Choice was presented by
Steph McGovern with guests Andrew Maxwell and Amy Gledhill. It was written and
devised by John Harvey and Joseph MacFergal with additional material from Laura
Major. The producer was John Harvey and it's a naked production for BBC Radio 4.
And Steph will be back with more brain-twisting dilemmas at the same time next
week. Six music. In 1978, Kate Bush releases his seminal debut album... The Kick
Inside. And on the record's 45th anniversary, we're celebrating the icon that is
Kate Bush. Six musics deep dive into The Kick Inside. You can find archive
interviews and exclusive performances, as well as playlists and programmes
featuring artists she's inspired. She was in her own world that she had created
herself. Way, way ahead of their time. To open BBC Sounds, click the Music tab
and scroll to find Kate Bush's Artist Icons Collection. Now on Radio 4, our
serialised story The Circus continues. A bar in North Belfast has been
refurbished and relaunched with an inaugural talent show and a massive cash
prize for the winner, prompting the show's host to give an interview promoting
the competition. As read by Tony Flynn. Dockyard Delores by Paul MacVey. It's
pronounced Delores, not Dolores. There's nothing dull about this dry queen
honey. Mysterious, some might say. Who is she under all that make-up, the
fabulous hair and glamorous dresses? They seek me here, they seek me there. I'm
like the lilac pimpernel. Too young to get the reference. I can see it in your
eyes. I'd explain it, but I'm nearly dead, love. I don't have the time to waste.
Forgive me, I'm running low on sugar. I'm not diabetic. Sweet things are my
attempt at counteracting all the bitterness inside me. You liked that one,
didn't you? It's the same with the drag shows. The cheekier we are, the edgier,
the more iské, the more the audience loves it. Especially the straights. Can't
get enough. And the ones who say they don't? Well, we know all about those who
shout the loudest. And that's scientifically proven. You can write that down
with an exclamation mark. I was referencing the scarlet pimpernel earlier. Oh, I
must have watched those black and white shows hundreds of times back in the
olden days, when this queen was just a twinkle behind my alter ego's unlashed
eyes. There I'd be in my mum's bedroom, in her dresses and heels, and a sweet
mess, let me tell you, and look at me now. A beautiful, glamorous, sophisticated
lady of the dockyards. It's that clash that brings the cash. Yes, that's mine,
and yes, you can use it. The scarlet pimpernel was the first superhero, you
know, and that's from the mouth of Mr. Marvel, Stan Lee himself. The character
was a camp on threatening character during the day, and they are not taken
seriously by society. But his alter ego was loved and feared, took on his
enemies and outwitted them all. A rebel with a cause. Can you see where I'm
going here? Yes. Basically drag queens are superheroes. Just another reason why
kids love us, now that we no longer need to live in the shadows. Are you getting
all this? I don't see you taking notes. Ah, phones. Is there nothing they can't
do these days? I still have my old one that barely does a thing but text and
call. The other drag queens laugh at me until they see how long my battery
lasts. Now listen, Trico, I will go off on all sorts of tangents so you will
have to keep hold of my reins. I could put a pair on, if you ask me nicely. I
did wear some last Christmas Eve and literally pranced up and down Union Street.
I had a flashing red nose and everything. I like to put the rude in Rudolph.
Where is James? I'm sorry, I'm sure he'll be here soon. I guess you're just
stuck with fabulous old me. Poor you. A private audience with a Belfast legend.
You'll be able to dine out on this one for years to come, Sunny Jim. That's what
we called James back in school. Well, Jimmy, to be precise. Who'd have thought
he'd appear back on the scene arriving home after 30-odd years away, he'd hang
out with my little gang at school sometimes, even though we were the freaks, the
fruits, the rejects, the weirdos. We were the exiled, so we had no choice but to
be on the outside. But he chose to be there when he had the charm and the looks
and the straightness to be with them, the norms. He was one of the rare kids who
wasn't embarrassed being seen with us. The rest were worried that being seen
with us tainted them. They'd be rejected and mocked too. There were some who
talked to us when no-one else was watching, but James did it every day. That
takes a special kind of character, to stand against the crowd, to stand up, to
take up for people when you don't need to. And that's why I agreed to do this
for him. I'm standing up for him now. I'm a superhero, remember? Don't be
putting this in your article. I don't want there to be any talk of the
difficulties he's been having. You've heard, of course. Look, he was always
going to face resistance from the locals. But what a lot of them don't know or
have forgotten is that he's a local too. He's from Ardoyne, for God's sake, even
though he did go to the Belfast Royal Academy, not something a kid of his
persuasion did back then, which, when I think about it, probably made him a bit
of an outcast with the Catholics he lived beside. So, you see, he was living a
lie in our school every day, like me. We were hiding our true selves to stay
safe. In a school that was for well-to-do Protestants, he was a working-class
Catholic. He wasn't the only one, but one of the few. I knew because on the way
home from school one day, I saw from the bus window as it turned around
Cliftonville Circus. James had taken off his tie and he was carrying his blazer
inside out, with the school badge hidden. If people knew your school, they knew
your religion, and that could get you killed. It was when I saw James take a
left down Alliance Avenue. I knew there were streets we Protestants wouldn't
walk down. Now things are starting to change. In Ballysilin Park, across from
me, I've seen some Catholics, younger ones, about your age walking their dogs. I
suppose nobody would know their background, but I recognise them from the
working men's clubs I do my shows at. I think it's brilliant myself, us moving
forward, but I'd be a liar if I didn't say it makes me a little uncomfortable.
There was a time when we had a chunk of our drawing, but no more, and the old
park road. From more or less Cliftonville Circus up, they're creeping up, street
by street. There's talk of one or two in my street. They just have so many kids,
don't they? Now, as I say, I don't mind. I think it's wonderful we're all moving
on, and I don't care what anyone is, and I don't care what you are. Honestly,
that's all in the past. Where is James? I'm getting annoyed now. Let's see if
he's been in touch. Pass my handbag, would you be a love? Did I catch you
looking at my legs? Eyes up here, dear. Peaky. There's my glasses. Aren't they
fabulously over the top? Very Daymedna average, don't you think? Quite the
inspiration she was. Christ, that night not, Daymedna as well. Right, get a pen
and paper and write down these references. Make a list. Get yourself educated.
Text from my mother, text from a little liaison, Don Jourault's. Put that on
your movie list for getting close in her frocks. Oh, here. Sorry, beautiful,
something's come up. I know you'll shine like the star you are. How can I stay
annoyed at a charmer like that? Anyway, let's start proper. You're sure this is
recording? Let me warm up. N'nore mi fa solatido. Have you seen the sound of
music? Sweet baby cheeses. In the name of baby Belle and all that's good in the
world, the list, child. Put it on the list. Stop watching football and Love
Island, though do watch Real Housewives. I'm pitching Real Housewives of Upper
Old Park at the moment, if you know anyone in the biz. James came back from
London, where he was huge, darling, simply huge in the property market. Owned
half of Soho as I hear it. Not that he said that to me. It's not his style to
brag, far too classy. Even with all that success, the lure of home was too
great. Who knows, I might have had something to do with that, but hush, hush.
Well, James sold up and is now bringing a bit of the West End to North Belfast,
and I think it's wonderful he bought over the old club. I know it's ruffled a
few feathers. Not the ones on this dress, honey. They're fake and rather
fabulous, don't you think? Those complaining on Facebook or fakebook, as I call
it, are just that. Fake. They're the dinosaurs who just don't want Belfast to
move on. If they had their way, they'd still have men in one room and women in
the other. Hard to believe it was like that when I was a kid. In that respect,
working men's clubs have moved with the times. Sure, they have me doing gay
bingo in West Belfast and everything. The haters can just suck it up. At the end
of the day, if that old place was making money, it wouldn't have been up for
sale, and yes, I get that it's another loss for us. Another Protestant bar gone.
The club was once surrounded by Protestant people living in Protestant streets.
It's now all Catholics on one side and us on the other. My James has zero
interest in all that stuff. He's lived in London all these years, with every
nationality under the sun and every street, he says. Wouldn't you know his luck,
though? Both sides here are against the place. One for what it's been and one
for where it's going. It's hard to win in Belfast. That's why I convinced James
to bring back North Belfast's Got Talent. Throw the locals a bone, I said. Get
them in and hopefully win them over. I've agreed to be the hostess with the
mostess. This area's never seen anything like it before. It'll certainly be the
first time I've done drag on a North Belfast stage. It's like my second coming
out, if you like. People round my way don't know my secret identity. To them,
I'm the mild-mannered gentleman who likes to read, the polite dog owner who
walks his teacup Yorkie to the local shops for a little chat and a nosy. But
that anonymity is all going to change soon. So, yes, we want everyone to come.
All ages, all religions, all genders, all sexualities, all talents. Sign up
soon. Write that. Do you like this new dress? Every sequin handsewn. Done by a
little seamstress who makes her daughter's Irish dancing costumes down the
Cliftonville. I met her in the butchers and one thing led to another. I wish I
could do it myself. Oh, don't get me wrong. I can design, use the sewing machine
too. A lot of things, in fact, but needlework. Have you seen these hands? That's
why I hide them with long gloves. And how I got my drag name. I started as
Dolores de Beauvoir, the surname after Simone. I had aspirations back then. Some
people might have said pretensions, but they were just jealous of my
intelligence. Not heard of de Beauvoir. Put her on the list. Raise yourself,
child. Anyway, the name didn't last. Especially after I started doing the clubs.
I didn't wear gloves back then and a nasty queen took one look at me and said,
There are the hands of a docker. Next thing I knew, Dockyard Dolores was out
there and the name stuck. I should thank that evil queen. She did me a favour.
It became part of my act and made me into the icon I am today. I bumped into
James in the street, would you believe? I recognised him right away. The same
blue eyes like a movie star. I had stared at them long enough as a lovestruck
teenager. Don't you be putting that in. That's between me and you. Of course I
said hello and well, I'd heard about his predicament. The business only knew and
feeling everyone against him. So I offered to help. James is coaxing me to
reveal my drag career. I mean, he's right with RuPaul and all that drag race
stuff. Sure, the kids love it and it's all over the TV. What's there to fear?
Well, the way they came after that young drag queen for reading stories to kids,
death threats and shameful accusations of unspeakable things, all because he's
wearing a dress. That is what actually made my mind up. I'm going to say it out
loud and be proud, on stage, whip the wig off and do my own take on a gender
reveal. I stand with drag queens. And I'll be doing gigs with that wee drag
queen and let them come for him and they'll see what these duckers' hands can
do. The Circus was written by Paul McVey and the reader was Tony Flynn. It was
produced in Belfast by Michael Shannon for BBC Northern Ireland. And the story
continues here on Radio 4 at the same time next week. More or less is next this
evening. Tim Harford and the team will be fact-checking a government claim about
falling reoffending rates, but also returning to the debate that sparked
consternation among loyal listeners everywhere. Should the word data be treated
as plural or singular? That's more or less just after the news. On Radio 4...
The Lord's Prayer is shared by Christians around the world. In this year's Lent
Talks, six people reflect on the words of this prayer, sharing stories of
forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. Lent Talks on Radio 4 and
BBC Sounds. Begins this Wednesday evening at 8.