TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at Midnight. This is Andrew Peach. MI5 has made an unprecedented
public apology after the inquiry into the Manchester Arena bombing found the
security service missed a chance to take action that might have prevented the
attack. Energy firms say they're expecting the government to continue some of
its support, for household bills beyond April. Boris Johnson has said he'll find
it very difficult to back the government's new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland.
The civil servant who investigated lockdown parties in Downing Street, Sue Gray,
has been offered a job by the Labour leader Sakhiya Starmer. A man and a woman
have been charged with gross negligence manslaughter after the remains of a baby
were found in woodland near Brighton. The final report on the Manchester Arena
bombing has concluded that the security service, MI5, missed a significant
opportunity to take action that might have prevented the attack which killed 22
people in 2017. The inquiry chairman, Sir John Saunders, found that the suicide
bomber, Salman Abadi, probably received assistance from someone in Libya and
that an MI5 officer failed to act swiftly enough on a key piece of information.
Much of the evidence for this part of the inquiry was heard in secret. Families
of the victims say they're disappointed they'll never know the full truth of
what happened. From Manchester, here's our North of England correspondent Judith
Moritz. Salman Abadi was the one who detonated the bomb which killed 22 people
at Manchester Arena, but this report says others also bear the responsibility.
Those who radicalised him, helping him make the device, and the agencies who
failed to stop him. The chairman of the Manchester Arena inquiry, Sir John
Saunders, spelled it out starkly. MI5 let Abadi slip through the net. There was
a realistic possibility that actionable intelligence could have been obtained
which might have led to actions preventing the attack. The reason for this
missed opportunity included a failure by the security service, in my view, to
act swiftly enough. The bomb exploded in the foyer of the arena at the end of an
Ariana Grande concert. Teenagers were leaving, parents were waiting for their
children. The youngest to die was just eight years old. For the families of
those who died, the report's findings are hard to take. Caroline Curry's
19-year-old son Liam was one of those killed. Forgiveness will never be an
option for such evil intentions and those that played any part in the murder of
our children will never ever get forgiveness, from top to bottom. MI5 to the
associates of the attacker, we will always believe that you all played a part in
the murder of our children. The report is critical of what it calls willful
blindness about politicisation in the Didsbury Mosque the family attended. The
chairman, Fawzi Haffar, denied this was the case. I can tell you here and now,
there is no place for radicalisation or politics or any evil acts. No one can be
radicalised with a ten-minute sermon. There are no political meetings. I do not
care what people say. And we did not turn a blind eye. This was the third report
to come out of the public inquiry. The first looked at the planning ahead of the
concert, whilst the second concentrated on the response of the emergency
services. Greater Manchester Police were heavily criticised in both. Stephen
Watson, the chief constable, says the force is fully resolved to never repeat
the failings of the past. He spoke of what he called a fierce determination to
ensure the loss and hurt experienced by those still suffering will not be in
vain. Almost six years after the bombing, the inquiry is now over, but the
publication of this third report is only part of the story. Another document for
the eyes of the government, MI5 and counter-terrorism police has also been
compiled. Its findings kept secret for reasons of national security. The Home
Secretary, Suella Braverman, has said she is committed to working with MI5 and
the police to ensure that vital lessons are learned. The head of the security
service, Ken McCallum, has said he is profoundly sorry that MI5 did not prevent
the attack. This from our security correspondent, Frank Gardner. This inquiry
has rightly focused on the failures that led to the worst terrorist attack in
Britain since 2005. The police and emergency services have already been
criticised, but today it was MI5, the security service, that is accused of
missing significant opportunities that could, says the inquiry, have led to
actions that may have prevented the attack. For reasons of national security, we
are not told exactly what those opportunities were, but some of them are
obvious. The bomber, Salman Abedi, was already on MI5's radar, and they knew he
had left the UK for Libya. Yet no action was taken to stop and search him when
he returned just four days before his attack, nor was he followed on his return,
something that might have led investigators to weigh he'd hidden the bomb. All
this despite his known contacts with the notorious Islamist radicaliser inside
Wakefield Prison. Today, the Director-General, Ken McCallum, read out a
statement in response, but refused to take questions afterwards. Gathering
covert intelligence is difficult, but had we managed to seize the slim chance we
had, those impacted might not have experienced such appalling loss and trauma. I
am profoundly sorry that MI5 did not prevent the attack. At the time, MI5 were
trying to monitor around 3,000 so-called subjects of interest and conducting
around 500 investigations. Today, they say they've put in place around 100
improvements and will study carefully the report's conclusions, but that is
likely to be of little comfort to the families of the victims of this appalling
attack. A former National Security Advisor and Chair of the UK's Joint
Intelligence Committee, Lord Ricketts, told the World Tonight that MI5 would
want to learn every lesson it could from the report. He said one of the problems
for the service was the quantity of intelligence it had to deal with. They have
thousands of fragmentary bits of intelligence. They have to put it together into
a pattern, find connections, and very often they succeed. But if they miss a key
clue or don't make a connection, then there can be devastating results, as we
saw in Manchester. And I know this organisation, they believe strongly in
learning. They will want to squeeze every last drop of learning possible out of
this report. With the inquiry's final report now published, our home editor Mark
Easton has this assessment of the findings. At the start of each of the three
volumes of the Manchester Arena Inquiry Report is an alphabetical list of the
names of the 22 who died. The individuals who were killed have always been at
the heart of this inquiry, Sir John Saunders wrote. The evidence has shown them
to be irreplaceable, unique people who lit up the lives of those around them. A
statutory public inquiry lasting two and a half years can become a forensic and
technical exercise, personal feelings easily squeezed out. But this inquiry has
consistently refocused on those who died and those who lived with the
consequences of that terrible night. Sir John identified the failings of the
venue, emergency services and security services. The families have described the
possibility that the attack could have been thwarted as a devastating
conclusion. But they paid tribute both to Sir John and his team for their
unwavering determination to uncover the truth, and also to those who had
supported them throughout. Yesterday the government announced it was setting up
a permanent expert panel to support victims after major disasters in England and
Wales. If the arena inquiry is about making sure lessons are learned, one of
those lessons is on how an inquiry can balance legal detachment with sympathy
and humanity. There are indications the government could maintain some level of
support for household energy bills beyond next month. But a £400 winter discount
will end so people can still expect to pay more than they do at present. Here's
our business editor Simon Jack. Typical households are due to see their energy
bills rise from £2,500 to £3,000 per year on April 1st as government subsidies
are scaled back. However, as wholesale energy prices have fallen dramatically
since last autumn, the cost of those subsidies is tens of billions of pounds
lower than initial estimates. The government has been under intense pressure to
use that unspent kitty to maintain support at or near current levels. The BBC
has learned that some energy companies are already preparing bills for April,
which assume that will happen. The clearest indication yet, the government will
bow to that pressure. But an additional £400 discount for all energy customers
paid in £66 monthly instalments from October last year is not expected to be
renewed beyond April, so most customers will still see their bills rise, albeit
by not as much as feared. The Treasury has said it was reviewing the situation
but would not respond to what it described as speculation. Boris Johnson has
criticised Rishi Sunak's new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland in his first
public comment since the agreement was announced on Monday. The former Prime
Minister said he'd find it very difficult to vote for the Windsor framework as
he believed it would act as a drag anchor on divergence from the EU. Our
political correspondent Ben Wright reports. While most Tory MPs were bonding at
an away day in Windsor, Boris Johnson was in London making a speech, blowing a
raspberry at his successor. Rishi Sunak's new Brexit agreement for Northern
Ireland replaces the deal Mr Johnson negotiated with the EU. It removes barriers
on trade across the Irish Sea and allows politicians in the Stormont Assembly to
potentially stop new EU laws applying in Northern Ireland. Until now, almost no
Tory MPs have publicly criticised the deal. But Boris Johnson said it would be a
drag anchor on the UK's ability to diverge from EU laws and standards,
undermining the point of Brexit. Mr Johnson called for his controversial
Northern Ireland Protocol Bill, which the EU argued would breach international
law, to be restored if the new deal does not work out, a deal he suggested he
might not support. I'm going to find it very difficult to vote for something
like this myself because I believed that we should have done something
different. No matter how much plaster came off the ceiling in Brussels and I
hope that if it doesn't work, we will have the guts to deploy that bill again.
However, Mr Johnson also said he was conscious of the political momentum behind
Rishi Sunak's deal. Speaking on a visit to India, the Foreign Secretary James
Cleverley said he hoped the agreement would win the backing of politicians in
Belfast. We really, really believe that this deal works well for the people of
Northern Ireland. It fully respects Northern Ireland's integral place within the
United Kingdom and I really, really hope that that is recognised by all the
elected representatives in Northern Ireland, including the DUP. At the moment,
the Democratic Unionist Party and a group of Tory Brexit hardliners at
Westminster are considering their response to the deal. But with a broad swathe
of Mr Sunak's party supportive and Labour pledging to back it, the deal looks
almost certain to clear a Commons vote, despite the grumblings from Boris
Johnson. The senior official who carried out the inquiry into government
lockdown parties has resigned from the civil service. Sue Gray has been offered
the role of Chief of Staff to the Labour leader, Sakir Starmer. This from our
political correspondent, Helen Catt. Sue Gray has long been viewed in
Westminster as an unimpeachable arbiter of standards. It was to Ms Gray, who's a
former head of propriety and ethics, that Boris Johnson's government turned to
produce the definitive report on Partygate. But her decision to resign from the
civil service after being offered the job with Labour has raised eyebrows.
Allies of Mr Johnson have reacted angrily. Jacob Rees-Mogg suggested it now
looked like Ms Gray's report was a left-wing stitch-up against a Tory prime
minister. Senior civil servants are asked to seek the advice of the
appointment's body, ACABA, when taking up a new role. It, in turn, advises the
prime minister to make the final decision on whether it is appropriate. However,
there are no powers to enforce the advice. A spokesman for the prime minister
said they would not comment further on an individual personal matter. A Cabinet
Office spokesperson has said it was reviewing the circumstances under which Ms
Gray resigned. The former Health Secretary Matt Hancock has accused the
journalist, who leaked more than 100,000 messages linked to his handling of the
pandemic, of a massive betrayal and breach of trust. The Daily Telegraph has
published a string of stories based on the correspondence, including details of
a row within Cabinet in late 2020 about whether school should be closed. Isabel
Oakeshott has defended her decision to pass the messages to the newspaper,
insisting it was in the overwhelming national interest. Here's our political
correspondent, Jonathan Blake. With the publication of more of Matt Hancock's
messages has come fresh scrutiny of big decisions with far-reaching
consequences. It's also prompted a bitter public row between the former Health
Secretary and the journalist who helped him write his book, Pandemic Diaries.
Isabel Oakeshott has admitted breaking a legal agreement by giving the messages
to the Telegraph, but denied she'd done it for money, saying instead it was
about getting to the truth in the national interest. This is about the millions
of people, every one of us in this country, that were adversely affected by the
catastrophic decisions to lock down this country repeatedly, often on the
flimsiest of evidence, for political reasons. Matt Hancock accused her of a
massive betrayal and breach of trust. In a statement, he said there was
absolutely no public interest case and that all the materials for his book had
been made available to the public inquiry into the UK's response to the
pandemic. Releasing them in this way, he said, gave a partial biased account to
suit an anti-lockdown agenda. The messages appear to show Mr Hancock trying to
bypass the then Education Secretary Sir Gavin Williamson to close schools in
England in December 2020, predicting a policy car crash when he said kids would
spread the virus the following month. The school's minister, Nick Gibb, defended
the government's actions. Day by day, new evidence was emerging as the
scientists were learning about this virus and from that experience and those
lessons, we were then taking decisions about what to do in schools. But we did
always want to do everything we could to keep schools open. The messages show
Matt Hancock congratulating Sir Gavin on what he described as a cracking
announcement on exams. What a bunch of absolute arses the teaching unions are,
he said. Sir Gavin replied, I know, they really, really do just hate work. He
since said he was talking about some unions and not teachers, who he said he had
the utmost respect for. Geoff Barton is the General Secretary of the Association
of School and College Leaders Union. We were being seen as people who were the
guardians of the nation's children and young people. We were being seen as the
people who would bring those young people back in. And for those very people who
put their head above the parapet and did the right thing for the nation's
children and young people to be sneered at in those terms, well, frankly, shame
on them. Further messages published by The Telegraph this afternoon suggest
Boris Johnson considered ending the first lockdown in 2020 earlier than planned,
but was told it would go against public opinion. The former Prime Minister
feared he had blinked too soon in announcing a second lockdown in November that
year on the basis of data that experts had told him was wrong. A man and a woman
have been charged in connection with the discovery of the remains of a baby near
Brighton on Wednesday. They've been arrested in the city on Monday. Here's John
Donison. The Crown Prosecution Service said Constance Martin and Mark Gordon had
been charged with gross negligence manslaughter, concealing the birth of a child
and perverting the course of justice. The remains of a baby were found yesterday
in an area of woodland near Brighton following a two-day search. This afternoon,
police said it was too early to say when the infant died, but said it may have
been some time ago. They said it was not yet possible to determine the sex of
the baby. Ms Martin, who's 35, and Mr Gordon, who's 48, were arrested in
Brighton on Monday after being missing for several weeks. They're due to appear
at Brighton Magistrates' Court tomorrow. The number of people now known to have
died in the train crash in Greece on Tuesday has risen to 57. More than 350
passengers were on board the intercity service from Athens to Thessaloniki when
it collided head-on with a freight train. From the site of the crash in central
Greece, here's our Europe correspondent, Nick Beek. This is a tragedy which has
played out in the foothills of Mount Olympus, home to the gods in Greek
mythology. Today's Greek government has been quick to blame human error for the
country's worst-ever train disaster. But the swift and simple explanation has
caused rising anger. Plenty believe the crash could have been avoided had
decades of safety warnings been heeded. Today, rail workers across Greece walked
out, affecting national services and the subway in Athens. They claimed it was
not safe for them to do their work. A 59-year-old station master in Larissa, the
city nearest the crash site, appeared in court charged with manslaughter by
negligence. Visiting a hospital nearby where relatives of the missing had
gathered, Zoe Rapti, Greece's deputy minister of health, told the BBC her
government wasn't to blame for the crash. It was a personal mistake. This has
been written and of course we will wait for the police investigation to give us
answers on that. Of course things should have been done during these years, but
of course Greece has faced a big economic crisis for more than 10 years, which
means that many things went back. The station master has denied any wrongdoing,
blaming the collision on a technical fault. But there are claims he may be
scapegoated to mask long-standing systemic failings. The Greek government has
promised an independent investigation, which it insists will deliver justice for
the victims and their families. Vladimir Putin has said a Ukrainian sabotage
group opened fire on civilians in southern Russia in what he claims was a
terrorist act. Russian officials reported that the Bryansk region was attacked
by a Ukrainian military drone and that saboteurs had taken hostages. The Kremlin
says the situation is now under control. The details of what happened haven't
been verified. Ukraine has denied responsibility. Here's Will Vernon. A murky
incident today in Bryansk region, near the border with Ukraine. The governor,
Alexander Bogomaz, said that a Ukrainian sabotage group had attacked a village.
The Russian security service, the FSB, said that its forces, together with the
Russian military, were carrying out an operation to eliminate Ukrainian fighters
who had violated the border. President Putin has cancelled a planned trip to
Stavropol region in the south of Russia. Via video link, the Kremlin leader
called today's incident a terrorist attack and promised to finish off those
responsible. Since Russia launched its invasion one year ago, Bryansk and other
areas along the border with Ukraine have been hit by shelling, drone attacks and
explosions. Ukrainian officials today denied their forces were responsible for
the attack in Bryansk, calling it a classic provocation by Russia. The US
Secretary of State Antony Blinken and the Russian Foreign Minister, Sergei
Lavrov, have spoken to each other face to face for the first time since Russia's
invasion of Ukraine. Their meeting took place on the sidelines of the G20 summit
in India, which ended without a joint statement because of divisions over the
war. Our correspondent Barbara Pletusha reports from New Delhi. It was a brief
encounter that lasted less than 10 minutes. They spoke on the move, said the
Russian Foreign Ministry, downplaying the exchange. Antony Blinken used it to
repeat privately a message he'd been giving his Russian counterpart Sergei
Lavrov publicly. End this war of aggression. Engage in meaningful diplomacy that
can produce a just and durable peace. President Zelensky has put forward a
10-point plan for a just and durable peace. President Putin, however, has
demonstrated zero interest in engaging unless and until Ukraine accepts, and I
quote, the new territorial realities. This was not a diplomatic negotiation. And
during the G20 meeting, Mr. Lavrov accused the West of failing to send the same
message to the Ukrainians. Instead, he said, it was encouraging Kiev to continue
the war. The deep divisions frustrated India, which said it wanted to use its
year as host of the G20 to focus on issues important to developing nations, like
tackling food and energy insecurity. In the end, the foreign ministers did reach
agreement on a number of such issues. But they weren't able to find consensus on
a joint statement because Russia and China refused compromise language on the
war that they had previously accepted. Differences have hardened over the past
year. A lawyer for the former England cricket captain Michael Vaughan has told a
hearing that allegations of racism made against him by his former teammate Azim
Rafiq were word against word. The England and Wales Cricket Board has been
setting out cases against Michael Vaughan and a number of other former players
as part of an investigation into Yorkshire County Cricket Club. Our sports
editor Dan Rowan was at the hearing. Michael Vaughan captained England to ashes
glory in 2005. But for the last two years, his reputation and his career as a
BBC broadcaster have been in jeopardy after he was alleged to have used racist
language by a former Yorkshire teammate, Azim Rafiq. Vaughan denies the claim
and today the two men came face to face at a disciplinary hearing. A current
England star Adeel Rashid has corroborated Rafiq's allegation and today he gave
evidence via live video link from Bangladesh, where the team is currently on
tour. Asked by Vaughan's lawyer Christopher Stoner KC of his memory of the
alleged incident, Rashid claimed Vaughan had said, there's too many of you lot,
we need to do something about it. Mr Stoner suggested that Rashid did not have a
clear memory of events, which Rashid rejected, along with claims that he'd been
pressured into backing up Rafiq. However, he did say that he didn't believe
Vaughan was a racist and that he believed the comments were a poor attempt at
humour. Rafiq was also cross-examined for the first time, accepting there had
been mistakes in the details he'd given between statements, but insisting that
what Vaughan was alleged to have said is pretty clear and consistent. Vaughan
himself is set to give evidence on the third day of this hearing, the latest
episode in a saga that continues to cast a shadow over the game. A pedestrian
who shouted at a cyclist on a pavement in Cambridgeshire, causing her to fall
into the path of a car, has been jailed for three years for manslaughter. A
trial at Peterborough Crown Court heard how Senior Ward died after she was
struck by the vehicle moments after passing Oriol Grey on a shared cycleway
pavement in Huntingdon in October 2020. Here's Howard Johnson. CCTV footage
showed Oriol Grey, who's 49, shouting at 77-year-old Celia Ward to, "'Get off
the pavement!' adding an expletive. Moments later, as she passed Grey, Mrs Ward
swerved off the pavement and into the path of a car. Jurors heard the vehicle
had no chance to stop or take avoiding action. Mrs Ward was pronounced dead at
the scene. Peterborough Crown Court was told that Grey, who has cerebral palsy,
left the scene before the emergency services arrived to buy groceries at a
supermarket. The judge said her actions had not been explained by disability. He
described the pavement as a shared path. Mrs Ward's husband of 53 years, David
Ward, told the court that the clip of his wife's last moments would haunt him
forever. Oriol Grey's lawyer said she would file an appeal against the sentence.
The Scottish Government has said the Caledonian Sleeper Rail service will be
nationalised in June. The current operator, Serco, is having its contract
terminated seven years early. The Transport Minister, Jenny Gilruth, said the
decision would provide stability and certainty for passengers and staff. In the
city, the 100 share index ended the day up 29 points at 7,944. On Wall Street,
the Dow Jones closed up 342 points at 33,004. On the currency markets, the pound
is trading at $1.19.4. Against the euro, sterling is at 1.12.7, making a euro
worth 88.7 pence. Antiquities experts in Egypt say they've discovered a hidden
corridor inside the Great Pyramid of Giza. The find was made by a team of
scientists who used cosmic ray imaging to map unexplored areas inside the
structure. Here's Alex Rhodes. The Great Pyramid of Giza was built more than
4,500 years ago, during the reign of the pharaoh Khufu, but it seems the last
remaining wonder of the ancient world still has some secrets to share. Hidden
close to the main entrance of the massive tomb, a 30-foot corridor has been
uncovered using cutting-edge technology. Rather than drilling and digging,
researchers at the Scan Pyramids Project used a less invasive technique called
cosmic ray muon radiography, which can penetrate solid objects more effectively
than even x-rays. Once they confirmed the tunnel was there, they used a small
endoscopic camera to do what no one had done for thousands of years. Have a look
inside. At a news conference, the Egyptologist overseeing the project, Zahi
Hawass, could barely contain his excitement. Today could be the most important
discovery of the century, because anything inside the Great Pyramid of Giza will
enter the houses and the hearts of people all over the world. So where does the
corridor go? Well, nowhere. The researchers believe it was likely built to
relieve the weight of the pyramid's north face, or perhaps another as-yet-
undiscovered room. Zahi Hawass told journalists that he was hopeful that it
could even be propping up the lost burial chamber of pharaoh Khufu himself.
Let's take a look at the morning papers now. MI5 could have stopped him, says
the independent website as it reports on the findings of the inquiry into the
Manchester Arena bombing. Failed, says the Daily Mirror. The Sun's headline is,
22 who should be alive. The latest instalment of the lockdown files in the Daily
Telegraph suggests that during the pandemic, senior police officers were told to
be strict in enforcing Covid rules. In leaked messages, the former health
secretary, Matt Hancock, says ministers are going to have to get heavy with the
police. Is this proof that the Partygate probe was a Labour plot, asks the Daily
Mail. It says there's outrage among Tory MPs over Sakhia Starmer's offer of a
job to Sue Gray. The Guardian reports that allies of Boris Johnson have launched
an all-out effort to scupper a parliamentary inquiry into lockdown parties at
Downing Street. According to The Times, the Prime Minister is concerned that Ms
Gray could use privileged information to benefit Labour. The Financial Times
says Rishi Sunak may intervene to block her from taking up the role for months.
Wayne Shorter, one of America's greatest jazz saxophonists, has died. He was 89.
Wayne Shorter played with the likes of Miles Davis, Joni Mitchell and Carla
Santana and performed with the hugely successful 1970s fusion group Weather
Report. David Sillitow looks back at his life. In Weather Report, Wayne
Shorter's soaring tenor saxophone was part of the magic that turned the jazz
fusion band into a mainstream chart success. Born in New Jersey, he was part of
three of jazz's most celebrated combos. Art Blakey's Jazz Messengers, Miles
Davis's mid-60s quintet with Herbie Hancock and in 1970, Weather Report. He also
helped bring jazz into rock, recording with Stilly Dan, Carla Santana and here,
Joni Mitchell, who considered him a poetic, good spirit. Eleven Grammys, a
lifetime achievement award. Wayne Shorter was jazz royalty. The headlines again.
The head of MI5 has said he's profoundly sorry the security service failed to
take action which could have prevented the Manchester arena bombing. The final
report on the attack found that an MI5 officer failed to act swiftly enough on
key information. There are signs the government could be ready to maintain some
support for household energy bills beyond next month. Boris Johnson has
criticised Rishi Sunak's new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland, calling it a drag
anchor on the UK's move away from the EU. There's anger among some Tory MPs that
the former senior civil servant who carried out the inquiry into government
lockdown party, Sue Gray, has been offered the role of Chief of Staff to the
Labour leader, Sakhiya Starmer. A man and a woman have been charged with gross
negligence manslaughter after the discovery of the remains of a baby near
Brighton. BBC News. Our newsreader tonight was Andrew Peach. A tomb with a view
is our book of the week. It continues in a couple of minutes, but first, it's
time here on BBC Radio 4 to get a weather report and forecast from the BBC
Weather Centre. Let's hear from Chris Fawkes. Hello, good morning. Well, we
continue to see quite a lot of cloud across the British Isles. It's moving back
in across from the North Sea and spreading across much of England and Wales as
we speak. It's mostly dry, mind you, and we will keep some clearer spells, the
best of these across West Wales and South West England, where we're looking at a
few patches of frost. The cloud also withers across southern and eastern areas
of Scotland, and that's been thick enough to bring a few patches of light rain
over recent hours. I think the rain will slowly ease off through the night, but
it's heading west. And I think for Northern Ireland, it will continue to be
quite damp here at times with just a few spots of rain from time to time. North
West Scotland, well, that's another area where we could see some clearer skies
working in. With the clearest skies in western areas, temperatures could dip low
enough to give a touch of frost, although for many, with it being quite cloudy,
we're looking at temperatures of around two to four degrees overnight. Now, take
a look at the weather charts into Friday. Well, for most of England and Wales,
we're looking at quite a cloudy day. The cloud across south east England is
probably going to be quite thin really, just 300 metres thick. So we'll be prone
to thinning and breaking at times and you might see some sunshine coming
through. Should also be a bit of sunshine at times for West Wales and parts of
south west England. But there's a lot of cloud yet to come in across northern
England and the Midlands. If you see some breaks in the cloud, well, they'll
arrive, I think, pretty late in the day. For Northern Ireland, we start off on a
damp note with a few patches of light rain falling from the cloud, probably
turning a little bit drier later on. And for Scotland, still a fair bit of cloud
across southern areas, but otherwise brighter weather in the northwest with some
sunshine at times. Now, whether it stays sunny where you are or you keep the
cloud all day, either way, temperatures not really changing too much. We're
looking at highs of eight or nine degrees. Now, through the weekend, there's a
tendency for the cloud to thicken. Should be a largely dry day on Saturday with
the best of any sunshine across western areas. Into Sunday, thicker cloud will
bring more widespread patches of light rain. Now, into next week, big changes
are on the way. Cold northerly winds and they will be bringing, for some of us,
some snow. That's the latest weather. Many thanks, Chris Fawkes. Now on BBC
Radio 4, the Book of the Week, the award-winning writer Peter Ross finds much to
celebrate in life as he tours Britain's graveyards. Today he visits the
country's oldest firm of Muslim undertakers where ritual and service combine to
offer comfort to grieving families. Andy Clark reads A Tomb With a View.
Whitechapel Road, a week before Christmas. Two crows perched on the minaret of
the East London Mosque. Surveyed the scene below. A busker in a Santa hat played
jingle bells on a trumpet and a woman in a black kneecap walked past. Shop sold
halal fried chicken. In the window of the Blind Beggar, where Ronnie Kray shot
and killed George Cornell, a sign advertised a gangster bus tour led by one
Mickey Goldtooth. In this street full of life, I turned in the direction of
death and went into the mosque through a side door down to the basement. I'd
been permitted to attend a ghusl, the ritual washing of a body. The man was to
be buried that afternoon. There was something arboreal about his body. He was
Nigerian and had died at the age of eighty. He lay on a steel table, thin dark
hair and a grizzle of white stubble. There was no question of shaving him for
the viewing. In Islam, the body is treated gently, reverentially, as if still
alive. It's said that the deceased retains awareness and can hear and feel. We
believe that not one hair should be touched, I'd been told. The ghusl was being
carried out by Khalil and Nouroul, two employees of Haji Taslim Funerals. It's
the oldest firm of Muslim undertakers in the UK. Khalil is twenty. He's a great
grandson of the founder, Taslim Ali. Nouroul, from Bangladesh, is a good bit
older. He has a long black beard and wears a woolen prayer cap. While he cleaned
the body, he recited Arabic prayers. A ghusl is an obligatory part of Islamic
burial. A body must be purified ahead of meeting Allah. Women wash women, men
wash men. Nouroul and Khalil were using vegan liquid soap and lukewarm water.
The washing complete, Nouroul anointed the body with attar, which is a perfume,
and then it was time for the shrouding. Men are wrapped in three sheets, women
in five, including a headscarf. Plain white cotton is used, regardless of wealth
or status. Iranian princess, Syrian refugee, London rapper. The undertaker will
bury you in exactly the same way. Dead is the important thing. There's a desire
to put the body under as quickly as possible. Only then can the spirit enter the
afterlife. Haji Taslim Funerals operates from a small office next to the mosque.
From here they carry out more than one thousand burials each year. In quieter
moments, of which there are few, it's possible to hear the call to prayer
broadcast from the minaret. Louder and more frequent is the ringing of the
phones used by Abu Khalid as he mans the desk. He arranges funerals in three
languages, Bengali, English and a little Urdu. He also has some Arabic. The
phrase Inshallah, God willing, is never far from his lips. Early one afternoon,
as I sat at a desk near his, two men walked into the office. They'd come to
arrange the funeral of Mr Ali, their father and brother, who died that morning.
The details were settled quickly. The man would be buried on the following day.
That's how fast and simple our funerals are, Abu told me, once they'd gone. Had
the men come to see him first thing, the relation could have had his funeral
prayers at lunchtime and been on his way to the cemetery by 1pm. Islamic law
requires burial as soon as possible after death. Cremation is forbidden. The
widespread idea that it should be done within 24 hours is cultural rather than
religious, but is taken very seriously. This haste can make the Muslim way of
death appear, to an outsider, functional to the point of indelicacy. It's not
uncommon, I witnessed this myself, for a family to contact the undertaker while
their loved one is still on life support. Taslim Ali, the founder of Haji Taslim
Funerals, was born in Assam and arrived in Britain during the Second World War.
He'd left India to escape poverty. His family were so poor they couldn't afford
to buy salt, his son Ghulam told me. His father went to Calcutta and found work
on British merchant navy ships. He was torpedoed in the English Channel, rescued
and taken to Kent. He decided to stay in Britain, where he found a job in the
Daimler factory. He met my mother in Coventry when bombs were dropping
everywhere, Ghulam explained. She married him and converted. Her name was
Josephine, a Welsh coal miners' daughter who came to be known as Mariam. They
started a family, lived in Cardiff for a time, then settled in London. To be
born in one country and die in another is the migrant's story in ten words. The
Haji Taslim family embody this in their own lives and in the service they've
provided for half a century. Taslim Ali was deeply religious. He started
arranging Islamic funerals not out of a desire to make money, but in answer to a
need. In the early days of mass immigration from Asia and North Africa, Muslims
struggled for the basics. Halal meat, a place to pray, a good death. Where were
you born is a question weaponised by racists. Where will you die has greater
significance. It is, if we're lucky, a choice. With the mass immigration of the
1960s and 70s, more and more Muslims were dying and being buried in Britain.
This, as much as starting families and businesses, was a putting down of roots,
a claiming of space. Six feet of English soil that would be forever Islam. Few
would regard it that way though. Death in Islam is seen as a kind of homecoming.
Ghulam Taslim had made it clear. When someone dies, we say the words, Inna
lillahi wa inna ilayhi rajiyoon. Surely we belong to Allah and to him we return.
Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi rajiyoon. I knew that phrase. I'd heard it. I wish I
hadn't. It's what Rania Ibrahim had said live on Facebook, looking down over
London from the 23rd floor of Grenfell Tower as the flames rose. She sounded a
little breathless, from the smoke or fear or both, but her faith was strong. She
died there in Flat 203 on June 14th, 2017, with her daughters, Hania and Fatiha.
She was 31, the girls three and five. She was a beautiful soul, her sister Rasha
told the inquiry. Of the 72 people who died in the fire, 42 were Muslim and 34
were buried at Gardens of Peace, the Muslim cemetery in Hainault, Essex. Rania
and her children were identified after three months and their funeral held on
September 29th, a day of driving rain. Muhammad Omar is a founder and board
member of Gardens of Peace. He conducted the burials of 32 of the Grenfell dead.
He's in his early 60s with a short grey beard and a mild air. When we met he was
wearing a skull cap and a pale green robe. He had the smoothness of a politician
and the warmth of a good priest. An underappreciated aspect of the Grenfell
story is that the grief of the families was exacerbated due to the time it took
to recover, identify and release remains. Given the religious significance of
burying quickly, the delay was especially difficult for Muslims. The families
couldn't get closure until they had something to bury, Omar said. A mother's
bones or whatever it may be, that was the biggest challenge. Although almost
every person buried at Gardens of Peace is placed in the earth in nothing more
than a shroud, the Grenfell dead were in coffins. This was because of the
condition of the bodies, a factor which also created complications during the
ghusl. Instead of the ritual washing, a dry ablution using dust from a special
stone was performed over the top of the shrouds. If you visited the Gardens of
Peace you'd find nothing to distinguish the Grenfell graves from the thousands
of others. The idea is that all plots are identical, just as all Muslims were
created the same by God. Each is marked by a mound of earth to prevent anyone
from stepping on the grave. On that mound there's a square of black stone with
the name and age of the deceased and a grave identification number. Muslims
visit cemeteries because, like anyone else, they miss the people who are buried
there. But it's also regarded as properly Islamic to go and face one's eventual
fate. People often say to Abu Khalid, the funeral director, that he's blessed to
be constantly reminded of death. He's inclined to agree. He hopes his heart
never becomes immune to it. It may look like the funeral directors are taking
the dead to their graves, he told me, but in fact the dead are taking them and
saying, you're going to end up here. When Gardens of Peace was founded in 2002,
its management estimated it would last 75 years. But after just 15, it was full.
A new site opened nearby at the end of 2017. A third site has already been
purchased and they're looking for more. The problem of how to find enough space
for Britain's dead is especially acute in the Muslim community, as they can't
cremate. Mohamed Omar believes that the current norm, where each grave is used
by one individual, is not sustainable. Will British Muslims accept the idea of
graves being reused, I asked. They'll have to, he replied, because the stark
reality is that there's so much demand on land. We were talking in the new
cemetery on Five Oaks Lane. The skyscrapers of London were visible on the
horizon. Through a veil of rain I could see the light on top of Canary Wharf.
The cemetery was muddy and mourners wore plastic bags around their shoes. A sign
asked visitors not to leave flowers on the graves. They had no religious value
or significance, it said, and were only for personal gratification. Nonetheless,
a few mounds did have flowers on them, and in one case a snow globe containing a
white plastic rose. Another sign asked visitors to observe the dress code. No
revealing or low-cut clothing. Skirts and dresses should reach below the knee.
No one, as far as I could see, was flouting this rule. But then there were
almost no women anyway. It was just after 3pm and a burial was taking place. A
92-year-old woman, originally from Bangladesh, was being laid to rest. I'd
travelled here in the hearse with her grandsons. They called her Nanny. One
prayed during the journey, the other kept his eye on Google Maps. Gulum Taslim
drov. If you go to Saudi Arabia, he remarked, the only time a woman goes to the
cemetery is when she's dead. In Britain, things aren't as hard line, but there's
still segregation. Nanny's coffin was brought close to the graveside by men. Her
shrouded body was removed by men and carried to the grave. She was placed inside
at a depth of six feet, resting on her right side, facing Mecca. Wooden planks
were arranged at an angle above her body, sheltering it from being touched by
the earth which was pushed in by a mechanical digger. The mourners, all male,
looked on. A few women watched from around 100 feet away. They were expected to
keep back during the lowering of the body and the burial and could go to the
grave after that point. The idea is to avoid close physical proximity of the
genders and loud expressions of grief. The emotions taken out of death in Islam,
I was informed. You're told how to mourn, you're given three days and then you
have to get over it. The men returned to their cars. The women went no closer,
but stood silent in the rain. Andy Clark was reading A Tomb with a View by Peter
Ross. The book was abridged by Anna Magnusson and the producer is Ailey
McCready. And you can hear the next episode at the same time tomorrow when the
author visits a cemetery, taking an innovative approach to survival. The
Shipping Forecast is coming up shortly. The Shipping Forecast is coming up
shortly. The Shipping Forecast is coming up shortly. The Shipping Forecast is
coming up shortly. Now on BBC Radio 4, time for the Shipping Forecast issued by
the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 0015 on
Friday the 3rd of March. The general synopsis at 1800 High, Faroes 1034,
dissipating by 1800 Friday. The area forecasts for the next 24 hours. Viking,
North Atzera, northerly or north-westerly 4 or 5, increasing 5 to 7, perhaps
gale 8 later, in North Atzera, showers later, good. South Atzera, north-westerly
5 or 6, increasing 7 later, perhaps gale 8 later, showers later, good. Forties,
north 4 or 5, backing north-west 5 or 6 later, showers later, good. Cromarty,
north 2 to 4, backing north-west 4 or 5, showers later, good. Fourth Tyne,
north-east 2 to 4, backing north-west 3 to 5 later, fair, good. Dogger, north 3
or 4, backing north-west 4 or 5, fair, good. Fisher, north-west 4 to 6,
increasing 7 later, perhaps gale 8 later, showers later, good. German Bight,
north or north-west 3 to 5, increasing 5 to 7 later, fair, good. Humber, north-
east, backing north 3 to 5, fair, good. Thames, north-east 4 or 5, backing north
3 to 5, fair, good. Dover, White, Portland, north-east 4 or 5, occasionally 6 at
first, fair, good. Plymouth, north-east 3 to 5, fair, good. Biscay, northerly or
north-easterly 3 or 4, occasionally 5 in north, showers, good. Trafalgar,
variable 2 to 4, showers in south-west, good. Fitzroy, east or north-east 3 to
5, occasionally 6 later, near Iberia, showers, good. Sol, east or north-east 3
or 4, occasionally 5 later, showers, good. Lundy, Basnet, north-east 3 or 4,
fair, good. Irish Sea, east becoming variable 2 to 4, showers, good. Shannon,
east 2 to 4, fair, good. Rockhall, east 2 to 4, becoming variable 3 or less,
showers, good. Malin, Hebrides, east 2 to 4, becoming variable 1 to 3, fair,
good. Bailey, variable 3 or less, showers, good. Farrell, north-west 3 or 4,
increasing 4 to 6, veering north 3 to 5 later, showers later, good. Faroes, west
3 to 5, veering north-west 4 to 6, becoming variable 2 to 4 later, showers
later, good. South-east Iceland, westerly veering north-westerly 4 or 5,
occasionally 6 at first in north, becoming cyclonic 3 to 5, showers later, good.
Now the weather reports from Coastal Stations for 2300. Tyree Automatic, east
north-east 2, 19 miles, 1033, rising slowly. Sturnaway, east by north 2, 24
miles, 1033, rising slowly. Larrick, north north-west 2, 24 miles, 1032, falling
slowly. Wake Automatic, west 2, 12 miles, 1033, rising slowly. Aberdeen, north
2, 14 miles, 1032, rising slowly. Locas, north-east by north 3, 16 miles, 1032,
rising slowly. Boomer, north north-east 3, 1030, rising slowly. Bridlington,
north-east 1, 1029, rising slowly. Sandetti Light Vessel Automatic, north-east
6, 5 miles, 1025. Greenwich Light Vessel Automatic, north-east 5, 5 miles, 1025.
St. Catharines Point Automatic, east 3, 1026, rising more slowly. Jazzy, north-
east 3, 9 miles, 1025, rising slowly. Channel Light Vessel Automatic, north-east
by east 5, 1025. Silly Automatic, north-east by north 3, 16 miles, 1027, now
falling. Milford Haven, north-east by north 2, 16 miles, 1028, rising slowly.
Aberporth, east by north 2, 19 miles, 1029, rising slowly. Valley, north-east 2,
11 miles, 1030, now falling. Liverpool Crosby, east south-east 1, 7 miles, 1030,
now falling. Valencia, east north-east 1, 24 miles, 1029, rising slowly.
Ronald's Way, north-east 2, 1030, rising slowly. Mallinhead, east north-east 3,
27 miles, 1031, rising slowly. McRihannish Automatic, east by north 3, 27 miles,
1031, rising slowly. Here's the weather forecast for the inshore waters of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland valid for the following 24 hours, issued by the Met
Office at 2300 on Thursday, 2nd March. General situation, high pressure, will
remain centred to the north-west of Scotland, giving a predominantly slack
northerly or north-easterly flow. From Cape Wrath to Ratchray Head, including
Orkney, Variable 3 or less, becoming north-west 3 to 5, showers later near
Orkney. Good. Ratchray Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed, Variable 2 to 4, becoming
north-westerly 4 or 5 in north, fair? Good. Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby,
Variable 2 to 4, becoming north 3 or 4, backing north-west later, showers at
first. Good. Whitby to Gibraltar Point, north-east 2 to 4, backing north 3 or 4,
occasionally 5 later, showers at first. Good. Gibraltar Point to Northforeland,
northerly or north-easterly 3 to 5, fair? Good. Northforeland to Sousa Bill,
north-easterly 4 or 5, occasionally 6 at first, in Strait of Dover, backing
northerly 3 or 4 later, fair? Good. Sousa Bill to Lyme Regis, north-east 4 or 5,
occasionally 3 later, fair? Good. Lyme Regis to Land's End, including the Isles
of Scilly, north-east 3 to 5, fair? Good. Land's End to St. David's Head,
including the Bristol Channel, east or north-east 2 to 4, fair? Good. St.
David's Head to Great Ormhead, including St. George's Channel, east or north-
east, backing north for a time, 2 to 4, showers for a time. Good. Great Ormhead
to the Mud of Galloway, variable, becoming north-west for a time later, 2 to 4,
showers at first. Good. Isle of Man, variable, mainly east or north-east, 3 or
less, mainly fair. Good. Loch Foyle to Carlingford Lock, east 2 to 4, becoming
variable, 1 to 3 later, showers at first. Good. Mud of Galloway to Mud of
Kintyre, including the Firth of Clyde and North Channel, easterly 3 or 4,
occasionally 5 at first, becoming variable, 1 to 3, showers at first. Good. Mud
of Kintyre to Arden American Point, east 2 to 4, becoming variable, 3 or less,
then north 3 or 4 later, fair. Good. Arden American Point to Cape Wrath, east 2
to 4, becoming variable, 3 or less, occasionally 4 later, fair. Good. Shetland
Isles, north-west 3 or 4, increasing 4 to 6, showers later. Good. And that
completes the Shipping Bulletin. I'm Neil Nunes, thanks for your company, and
here's wishing you a very good night. Shipping Bulletin Shipping Bulletin
Shipping Bulletin