TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 That's Rewinder with me Greg James this Saturday from 10.30 on Radio 4 and BBC
Sounds. Greg James is a former smuggler who's an immigration lawyer says the new
legislation suggests the government has missed the point by targeting
individuals rather than the people smugglers who offer them a route to the UK.
That's almost an admission yesterday from Rishi Sunak saying well we can't catch
the gangs who are profiting from this so what we're going to do is punish the
end user. It's almost the equivalent of saying we're going to lock up all drug
users and hope that drug dealing stops and we know that doesn't work. Downing
Street has described Gary Lineker's criticism of the new asylum policy as a
threat to the people. He's also described Gary Lineker's criticism of the new
asylum policy as not acceptable and disappointing. The Match of the Day host has
said he'll continue to speak up for people with no voice after comparing the
language used to launch the plan to 1930s Germany. The BBC says it will have a
frank conversation with Gary Lineker about its impartiality guidelines. A
14-year-old has been sentenced for causing the death of a woman while riding an
electric scooter. The victim was a 78-year-old 71-year-old Linda Davis on a
pavement in Nottinghamshire in June last year. She died six days later in
hospital. He was given a 12-month referral order and a five-year driving ban.
His parents have been fined and given a six-month parenting order. The daughter
of the Duke and Duchess of Sussex has been christened at their California home.
Princess Lilibet Diana, who was born to Prince Harry and Meghan in June 2021,
was christened on Friday. It's the first time she's been publicly called a
princess since King Charles acceded to the throne. The Met Office has issued an
amber weather warning for snow in parts of the Midlands and Northern England
tomorrow and Friday, saying there could be significant disruption. Last night
was the coldest night of the year so far, with temperatures in the Highlands
dropping to below minus 15 Celsius. BBC News. Elon Musk and Gary Lineker have
both been in the news for their use of Twitter. The Media Show will have more at
half past. First on Radio 4, Matthew Syed dives into a murky story of a lost
wedding ring and explores what truly motivates us to give our best. I live in an
area where I'm on the lake and my best friend had just purchased a home. This is
Felicia Schaefer. On a sunny September afternoon in 2010, she and her husband
are in the stunning waterside city of Prior Lake in Minnesota. They're on their
way to a friend's housewarming party. We took our boat over there. Then my
husband asked me where he should park. And I said, you should park over here and
kind of pointed to where he should park. And at the same time I was putting
lotion on my hands and I threw my ring off. It just slid right off and it went
right in the lake. And the area that they live on, their bay, is called Mud Bay.
And this is an area where people lose their motors of their boats and you can't
find them. Felicia was in dire straits. This was a wedding ring, laden with
precious stones and priceless memories. And it seemed to be lost forever. But
then Felicia gets put in touch with a local scuba instructor. His name? Kevin
Burkhart. I was just sitting down to a TV dinner and I got a phone call from a
frantic woman that had lost her wedding ring in the lake. I'm very comfortable
diving at night. I love scuba diving at night. So I thought, well, why not? Why
not? I'm Matthew Side and this is Sideways. My show about the ideas that shape
our lives with stories of seeing the world differently. In this episode, I want
to look at our preoccupation with rewards. Why we give them what they achieve
and whether turning away from them might actually be the most rewarding thing of
all. Kevin Burkhart was a young man who was a scuba diver. Kevin Burkhart was a
bold child. I suppose I was four years old and I recall I did not like to be
controlled and confined to the space of school. And I didn't like the vegetables
that they served for lunch. And I just wasn't going to have it anymore. The
vegetables were the last straw. He wanted to escape. The bathroom had these low
level windows that came down to about a foot off the floor. So the day before
with my best buddy Tracy, we did a test run. We opened the window, looked at
each other and thought, we could do this. But then when the big moment came,
there was a change of plan. My friend would not join me, but I was committed. I
was committed little four year old brat. And so I opened the window and hopped
out and walked across this lawn to a busy street and walked on the street
towards home. I should perhaps say that Kevin was spotted by a classmate's
mother who promptly returned him back to school. But this story isn't really a
tale of daring escape. It's a good example of Kevin's character. Even as a
youngster, it didn't matter that the goalposts had shifted, that the scenario
had suddenly become much more difficult because Kevin was determined to stick to
his plan. I, in my life, was never really enough of a bad boy to play truant
from school, but I can relate to Kevin. We're pretty much the same age, just a
year between us. Both of us nowadays do quite a lot of public speaking. We also
have a shared love of sport. But while I was mastering table tennis, Kevin's
tastes were rather more high octane. I remember I saw a speaker that talked
about a concept called R.O.H. Instead of R.O.I. R.O.I. being a business term for
return on investment. R.O.H. was return on heartbeats because you've got a
finite amount of heartbeats in your life. And accomplishing as much as you
possibly can with the finite amount of heartbeats that you have, I really
appreciated that. Return on heartbeats, it's a brilliant concept. And looking to
cash in, Kevin sought out sports that would set his pulse racing. Kevin spent
his 20s and early 30s training to be a snowboarding instructor and a water ski
instructor before turning his eyes to the sky to train as a skydiving
instructor. And it was this sport that would come to hold a much more personal
place in his heart. It was a Saturday morning and I felt this overwhelming urge
to call my father and tell him that I loved him. And when he answered the phone,
I could tell he was emotional, so something was afoot. And he said that he was
diagnosed with Parkinson's the day before. About the same time I had started
skydiving, so I think around 2006, I had this idea. I wanted to do something a
little bigger, something that would really raise awareness and draw attention to
Parkinson's and raise some significant money for the cause. My thought was, what
if I did 100 skydives in a day? If you're wondering, a normal number of skydives
in a single day, even by the most experienced people, is about 10, 20 if you're
really pushing it. And I was able to get 100 skydives in and I raised about
$55,000, I think. And we got tremendous coverage for it because if a knucklehead
kid has fallen out of an airplane 100 times in a day for his dad, for
Parkinson's and cow pastures in Wisconsin, it's a pretty good story. The self-
described little four-year-old brat had grown into an incredibly motivated and
driven adult. And these are, I think, really admirable qualities. It's not just
in sport that motivation matters. It's in education, when one is studying, in a
relationship, in a job. In order to keep going, to battle through adversity, we
need to care, we need to really think about it. We need to be ready. We need to
care. We need to really want it. And when Felicia's ring flew into Mud Bay,
Kevin, who's also, of course, a talented scuba diver, didn't think twice about
offering to help out. So initially I came down to the dock and I said, OK, well,
with the flashlight, point out on the water where that ring is. And she showed
me and then I gave the flashlight to the husband and he pointed to a completely
different place on the water. I'm in trouble. I went with what she said because
I figured she was more reliable. He jumped right in the water. Kevin heads to
the bottom of the lake. I'm only in 10 feet of water, pitch black, can't see a
thing. Everybody was sort of like, this is ridiculous, Felicia. Like, you're
never going to find your ring. I saw a little flash, a little blink, a glimmer
of something maybe five feet away from me. I came up. I screamed across the
water. I found it. Everybody just started screaming. Felicia was beyond excited.
Her precious ring with all those memories was back on her left hand. My husband
went up to him as he was getting ready to leave and offered him something for
helping and he did not take it. I just said, no, don't worry about it. It's OK.
It was just fun to get out the gear and get wet. I think it is good to share
what you have, give your gifts and do it without expectation of reward. Kevin
pulled himself away from a quiet night at home and dived into a pitch black lake
at night for a stranger. In exchange for nothing. I'm getting the feeling that's
just the type of guy he is. But would it not have been understandable if he had
accepted the reward? Who hasn't been happy to receive a bottle of wine for
feeding the neighbor's cat or a bonus at work for doing a good job? The concept
of a reward is as simple as it gets. You do that and I'll give you this. This
kind of transaction creates a classic win win situation where both the person
offering the reward and the person being rewarded get something they both want.
But looking a little closer at the psychology reveals a few wrinkles in this
conventional way of thinking. A reward is something desirable that's offered
with conditions attached. It's a form of doing things to people just as
punishments are rather than working with people. Alfie Kohn is an author and
lecturer who's been outspoken on the use of rewards for decades. He wrote his
book, Punished by Rewards, in 1993. More than 100 studies done across cultures,
across genders, across ages and across tasks overwhelmingly show that when
people are doing the task in order to get a reward, those people tend to be less
interested in that task going forward. One of Alfie's favorite studies involved
kefir, also sometimes pronounced kee-fur. It's a kind of yogurt drink. A
researcher divided little kids into three groups. One group was asked to simply
taste the kefir. The second was praised for drinking it. And the third was
offered free movie tickets if they drank the kefir. What this researcher was
curious about is how the kids would feel about kefir a couple of weeks later.
What she found is that the kids who were just asked to drink it liked it about
as much or a little more than before. But the kids who got the movie tickets and
the kids who were praised no longer wanted to touch the stuff. As soon as they
got the reward, they became less interested and found the drink less appealing.
It is, I think, fascinating that both the cinema tickets and the praise each had
negative effects. But Alfie Kohn argues that praise is simply another vocal form
of a reward. The reason for this decline in interest has to do with two
fundamentally different kinds of motivation. Psychologists distinguish between
intrinsic motivation, which means doing something because you find it valuable,
worthwhile in its own right, and extrinsic motivation, which means you do one
thing so that you'll get something outside of, extrinsic to the task. Intrinsic
motivation is killed by extrinsic motivators, so that the more you reward people
for doing something, the more they tend to lose interest in whatever they had to
do to get the reward. In other words, the road to demotivation can be paved with
extrinsic rewards. And you may be thinking, OK, but who cares if a group of kids
don't like a particular yogurt? But Alfie Kohn asks us to look at the bigger
picture. I don't care about how kids feel about kefir, but I do care about how
kids feel about science or reading or math. And I care about adults wanting to
do their jobs well. So substitute for kefir whatever the thing is that we're
rewarding people for doing, and you'll see the same diminution of interest from
the reward. In one of my favorite experiments, students from the School of the
Art Institute of Chicago were interviewed to find out if they were intrinsically
motivated, in other words, motivated by the love of art, or extrinsically
motivated more by the money. And when they were tracked down 20 years later, it
was the intrinsically motivated students who had progressed further and they had
earned more money because they sustained their inspiration and inner joy of
creating art. As one researcher put it, it is those who are least motivated to
pursue extrinsic rewards who eventually receive them. Now I guess that most of
us see some extrinsic rewards as necessary. We want to get paid a salary, for
example, for doing our jobs. And there is very good evidence that if we are
underpaid for our work, if we're not compensated fairly, that can definitely
lead to serious demotivation. The trouble I think comes when money or other
extrinsic rewards become the dominant or sole motivator. When employers, for
example, try to buy more effort with ever larger carats, because this can
eclipse the deeper, more human connection with what we do. I remember watching
Roger Federer warming up on the practice courts at Wimbledon because it was a
revelation. His face, he was smiling, he caressed the ball, he joshed with his
playing partner. His love of the game shone through. I kind of wonder if this is
what it might have been like to watch Picasso doing his preliminary sketches or
Jimi Hendrix tuning his guitar before a performance. Federer has definitely
played tennis a long time and earned a lot of money. But he's also found a way
to sustain that childlike enthusiasm, the purity of the relationship that drew
him to tennis in the first place, before any money was involved. And I think
that was the fuel for his passion and longevity. He simply told me, you should
never stop playing for love. But this is still a very challenging concept. I
have to say that a couple of years ago I made the classic mistake of using a
monetary bribe to get my children to engage more diligently with their homework.
50p a pop since you asked. As a consequence, they did their homework but they
lost their fascination with the love of learning because it was now all about
the money. It backfired, the bonuses had to stop. And this is an issue that
Rachel Tomlinson is well used to. It does sound counterintuitive to say, oh,
we're not doing rewards. It sounds really mean, you know, and it's fundamental
if you go, yeah, we don't reward our children. They go, oh! Rachel is a
headteacher at Barrowford Primary School in Lancashire. One day, two of her
teaching staff went to a local nursery for a training day. Before returning to
Barrowford, they visited the staff room, just in time to witness the big reveal
of the nursery's Employee of the Month award. They said, Rachel, it was awful.
Both of us were sitting there thinking, gosh, imagine if this was our staff
room. How would that feel? And would we rather be the Employee of the Month or
not be? And we couldn't decide which was worse. The staff recognised their
discomfort at being singled out for praise. It felt manipulative and toe-
curling. But then we kind of, like, brought ourselves back down to earth a
little bit and then kind of went, is that not what we do to our children every
week? They had been rewarding children with Star of the Week to supposedly
motivate good work and behaviour. But wasn't this just the same as Employee of
the Month by a different name? They took that question to the pupils. So we
said, you know, when you get Star of the Week, how does it feel? And they kind
of all looked at each other a bit shiftyly. And then one very brave person went,
well, we just know it's our turn. And then they all agreed. And, like, we kind
of sat there a bit dumbfounded, really. But what about if you've done something
really well, what do you need? And what they said was that they just needed to
share that achievement with somebody whose opinion mattered to them. Well, that
immediately just rang really true, because, you know, as adults, if we achieve
something, what do we do? We phone our partner or our mum. So that's kind of
what was a bit of the sea change for rewards from us, really. From out of the
mouths of babes, the Barrowford staff discovered that their assumptions about
what was motivating their students couldn't have been more wrong. Star of the
Week was scrapped, and the stickers, certificates and other rewards-based
paraphernalia quickly went in the bin too. Rather than focusing on changing the
behaviour of their students through prizes, Rachel and her staff looked inwards.
A lot of the time, children resist learning because it doesn't feel
psychologically safe. They're very stressed about mistake-making, they're very
stressed about misconceptions, they're very stressed about all of that stuff.
Now, if there's a sense of psychological safety, that dissipates that somewhat,
so it's all right to make mistakes and it's all right to get things wrong. It's
all about celebrating learning for learning's sake, so we celebrate learning
because learning's really good and learning's really important and learning's
really fun. And it certainly can be fun if you have great educators. The primary
teachers who most inspired me as a boy were big on bringing the subjects to
life, lighting that fuse of fascination, but Gold Stars and Pupil of the Week
prizes, not so much. For Rachel's students, moving away from a system of
extrinsic rewards has so far proven to be a success. But not every day is a
school day, and it is worth noting that rewards can, in certain contexts, be
vitally important. The reward for information used to catch tax cheats has just
gone up. US authorities have awarded Bradley Birkenfeld $104 million, the
biggest payment to a single American whistleblower, according to his lawyer.
Today is a great day for whistleblowers. Bradley Birkenfeld was once a fairly
average wealth manager working at the Swiss firm UBS. That was until 2008, when
he turned whistleblower and raised the alarm about illegal offshore banking
practices. In 2012, he received that eye-watering reward you just heard there,
$104 million. Critics of US whistleblower reward laws like this one are quick to
highlight the potential pitfalls. What if a kingly sum like this encourages
false allegations? But malicious reports are, in fact, incredibly rare. Another
reason that reward laws for whistleblowers have support is they act as an
encouragement for people to step forward. Studies have pointed out that
whistleblowing is amongst the most effective ways to fight financial wrongdoing.
But the professional and personal consequences of whistleblowing can be severe.
Many lose their jobs or get blacklisted from their chosen field after speaking
out. The argument then is that these admittedly generous rewards provide a sense
of security for potential whistleblowers. So when it comes to whistleblowing, it
would seem that the rewards provide value for money. The problem, however, is
that when we conceptualize motivation through the prism of rewards alone, this
is when we can miss the richer, more multidimensional view of what truly drives
people to give their best. Because that's ultimately the thing about intrinsic
motivation, the kind that comes from the love of the activity itself, from the
purpose and meaning that it confers. It can help us to bounce back from life's
toughest moments. 2012, I had a terrible snowmobile accident. What happened
would affect my life forever. I had a head-on collision, shattered four
vertebrae and my collarbone. All the nerves that run my left arm avulsed from
the spinal cord, and so I ended up being paralyzed in my left arm for the rest
of my life. Kevin's life changed overnight. He was once a master of adventure
sports. Now, he'd have to start all over again. I would say about four months
after the accident, I had hit rock bottom. I was suicidal at the time, and I
didn't know how the hell I was going to get my life back together and get back
to what I had known before. How was I going to get Water Scheme back with my
friends at 6.30 in the morning? I would watch them go by, and I couldn't join
them. And I'd been doing that since I was a little kid, so that was brutal. It
would take time, the love and support of his family and friends, as well as no
small amount of physical and mental effort on Kevin's part. But eventually, that
desire to get a return on heartbeats began to win out. When I began experiencing
life with one arm, part of that journey was finding solutions to maintain my
life the way it was or retrieve my prior life. A lot of people mention the new
normal. I designed a sport harness that held my arm in across my body and held
my shoulder up in socket. I was able to scuba dive with one arm. I loved cross-
country skiing, doing triathlons, water skiing, of course, snowboarding, and I
was able to figure all those out relatively easily. By this point, Kevin was now
in his early 40s, and he'd had, to put it mildly, a pretty wild ride. But he
finally began to find his new normal, getting back to the adventure sports he
knew and loved. But Kevin being Kevin, scuba diving, cross-country and water
skiing, triathlons and snowboarding just weren't enough. He had loftier
ambitions. I thought, well, the biggest challenge would be to try and figure out
a way to skydive with one arm. It's an unassuming, slightly overcast morning in
August 2012. Kevin Burkhart is in a plane thousands of feet up in the air, door
open, harness on and parachute primed. He's surrounded by a few chosen friends,
and their shouts of encouragement are lost in the deafening clamour of the
roaring engine. Of all the challenges Kevin has faced, this is by far the most
dangerous. Kevin breathes deeply, and then he leaps. When I came in for my first
landing, it was a perfect twinkle-toes landing. It was just fantastic, and
everybody came running over screaming. And there was a line of girls to kiss me.
It was just, it was Shangri-La. It was a wonderful life moment. I have never
faced challenges like those of Kevin, but I do know that when adversity has
struck, having a strong passion, whether in public speaking or sport,
broadcasting, journalism, that has helped me to weather the storm. Kevin is
clearly a motivated man. You just don't throw yourself out of a plane as many
times as he has if you're not. And barely a year after his accident, Kevin would
go on to complete another 151 single-armed skydives in a day, a new personal
record which raised a further $130,000. That, I would agree, was an impressive
feat. I'll take credit for that. That was a very unique thing to do and
accomplish, and I doubt that will ever be seconded in the world again. Kevin did
these things not for the money or the other accolades, but because he wanted to,
a drive to do what he loves to the best of his ability, to challenge himself.
And it's that perseverance that, astonishingly, led Kevin right back to the
muddy lake. In 2015, five years after finding the first ring, Kevin was called
upon to search for another one. Once again, he saved the day, and just like last
time, he turned down the reward. It's often asked, why do you do it without any
expectation of reward? And I think that answer is quite simple. Return on
heartbeats. Get out and do things. I really hope that maybe I'll get the
trifecta someday and I'll find a third wedding ring. That would be very special,
wouldn't it, the rule of threes? I love the concept of return on heartbeats. And
you can see this philosophy shining out of Kevin's life and his passion and in
his resilience. After all, what is the true value of retrieving a lost wedding
ring? A wad of cash? Or the knowledge that you've used your passion and skill to
make someone's day? And what's the value of skydiving, the lure of prize money,
or the pure exhilaration of free-falling to earth? Not all of us have choices
about what we do in life. But when we are able to focus on what truly matters,
when we break out of the conceptual straitjacket of carrots and sticks alone,
motivation can be transformed. Matthew Side will be back at the same time next
week with a story about a woman whose change of accent challenged her entire
identity. And there are more episodes on BBC Sounds. Now before the media show,
here's what's coming up this time on Friday. Now here's Ros Atkins with the
media show. Hello and welcome. Well, today we'll look at how Elon Musk picked a
Twitter fight with a sacked employee and then ended up saying sorry. We'll talk
to Cara Swisher on that. We'll also look at algorithms that are used to track
the number of people who have been in a relationship for a long time. And we'll
also look at how the media has been able to track the number of people who have
been in a relationship for a long time. We'll talk to Cara Swisher on that.
We'll also look at algorithms. They play a huge part in deciding what media
content we all consume. But how do content producers factor that into what they
make when so little is known about what these algorithms are doing? And we need
to talk about Gary Lineker. The BBC says it's having a frank conversation with
him after he tweeted about the language setting out was not dissimilar to that
used by Germany in the 30s. We're told by the BBC that Gary Lineker has been
spoken to about his responsibilities. Well, let's bring in Roger Mosey, former
head of BBC TV News, former head of BBC Sport, now Master of Cell in college at
Cambridge University. Hi, Roger. Thanks for coming back onto the media show.
What would you do about Gary Lineker? Well, I think what we now have is
fundamentally incompatible positions. So the BBC says it has its editorial
guidelines, and Tim Davies said if you want to be a social media campaigner,
fine, but you can't work for the BBC. And you then have Gary Lineker saying it's
about freedom of speech, and he's someone I very much like and respect, but at
the moment he doesn't seem to be willing to tailor his views to what the BBC
thinks its guidelines are. So I think this is something of a car crash, I'm
afraid. And if it's that, if you were Director General, what would you do about
it? Well, I think it's an incompatible couple of positions. I mean, one thing
the BBC could do is say, actually, Gary Lineker, for various reasons, that he's
a national figure, for historical reasons around his contract, he is outside our
editorial guidelines, and he alone can differ from the BBC policy. It's
something you could do. I don't think it's ideal. Or if you say you have to live
by the editorial policies, the problem is the BBC has been a bit weak and wobbly
about this for the last five or six years, in that it's been pretty obvious that
Gary isn't really complying with the letter of the law of the BBC guidelines.
The BBC has upheld complaints against him and fretted about it all the time, and
it's sort of pretended that it's all right, but a lot of people have felt it's
not, and there have been people in BBC Sport and BBC News who say, well, if I
said that, I'd get fired. And they're right, really, so it's very hard to have
that outlier of Gary Lineker. Well, as you allude to, Roger, the issue of Gary
Lineker tweeting on political subjects has come up before. In fact, it came up
when he and I spoke for the media show in 2021, and this is what he told me. I
don't really tweet much about politics, a little bit. I'm interested in
politics, but I don't, you know, I try to be sensible. I think that's what I try
to be, and I think, I don't know, I've never had any phone calls from... So Tim
Davie, when he came in, didn't... I've had two or three conversations with Tim
Davie since he's been in, but he's never called me up and said, you can't tweet
about that or you can't tweet about this. But when you met him, did he talk to
you? I don't think they could do that anyway. I mean, I'm my own person. Well,
that was 2021, and today Gary Lineker's not taken this tweet down, he hasn't
apologised, and he's tweeted that he'll continue to try and speak up for those
poor souls that have no voice and apparent reference to those on the small
boats, all of which has given the BBC plenty to think about, not, as Roger was
saying, for the first time. And Gary Lineker's opinions came up in a
parliamentary select committee in September last year, when MPs asked the BBC's
Director General, Tim Davie, about this. Gary and I have had a conversation that
says, and I think it's been a massive improvement to where he was a few years
ago, in terms of his entry into party politics. I think that banning people
completely from getting to any issues-based tweeting is probably the wrong
position to do, but there's a standard there. We talk about it. I'm very
supportive of him. Well, that was Tim Davie last September. This is Tim Davie
today being doorstepped by a BBC journalist. I haven't spoken to him, but...
What will you be saying to him? I wouldn't reveal anything in terms of... I
think it's totally appropriate that we speak privately to members of the team.
How many strikes will someone like Gary Lineker get writing on social media?
Well, again, I wouldn't talk specifically about individuals. It's been a couple
of times, though, now, hasn't it? I don't think it's right. I think the BBC
absolutely puts the highest value on impartiality, and that's clearly important
to us. Thanks very much. The BBC has also sent the media show this statement,
saying... But, Roger Mosey, isn't the problem here that while for news
journalists the rules are very, very clear on what can and can't be said, it's
not quite as clear for people who work for the BBC, in particular in a freelance
capacity, who are outside the news division? Well, let me say I like and respect
Gary Lineker very much, and many people listening to this programme will think,
actually, they agree with him on quite a lot, and so do I. I think the problem
is, if you imagine that it was somebody tweeting the opposite, if they were
saying Suella Brabham is right and refugees should be turned back and actually,
you know what, Brexit is working, I think people would find that difficult
coming from a BBC presenter paid by the licence fee. And the fact is that if you
take £1.4 million a year from licence fee payers, there are some obligations on
you to keep your views more private. And I think there are ways of doing it. If
you do want to dance on the head of a pin, if Gary had tweeted, I support
refugees and refugees should be treated humanely, that might have been OK. The
problem is, once you start attacking Suella Brabham, and then the reference to
Nazi Germany in the 1930s comes in at some subsequent point, it's very hard
indeed to see how that fits with BBC guidelines on being impartial on current
politics as a BBC presenter. And as you're unpacking for us, this isn't just a
media story, it's a political story as well. Here in the Media Show studio with
me is Alva Ray, host of Politico's Westminster Insider podcast. And in a week,
Alva, that the government and Rishi Sunak wanted to talk about small boats, this
story, I guess, gives additional momentum to that. Yeah, I think so, absolutely.
I mean, I think there's probably a feeling in Number 10 that they were quite
happy with the front pages this morning. Pretty much an equal division of people
announcing the small boats policy itself in quite positive terms, The Times and
The Express sort of saying that Rishi Sunak was laying down the law, being
clear, we decide who comes here. And then some other papers leading on the Gary
Lineker story, but sort of suggesting that maybe he should be sacked from his
role. So I think that they've been kind of happy with the spin on it so far. And
Suella Brabham alluded to Gary Lineker on BBC Breakfast earlier. Her appearance,
all appearances by ministers will be controlled by the Number 10 comms
operation, communications operation. Help us understand how that's running at
the moment. Well, it's very interesting. So because this is a media show and we
can get into it a bit more, the person behind all of this is a woman called
Amber de Botton, who used to be the head of home news at ITV, which is a sort of
abstract title, but really she was one of the most senior people, one of the
people behind all the Partygate stories. Really well known around Westminster,
really well regarded. Politicians have tried to poach her before,
unsuccessfully, to run their comms, but she finally made the move into Number 10
to help Rishi Sunak, having essentially brought down Boris Johnson with her own
journalism. So she's really highly regarded. Lots of people know her really
well. Someone like Beth Rigby or Robert Peston, who you see on TV, would have a
really close personal relationship with her from working with her before. And
really she's come in and has brought in a number of changes, but I think the
main one, which listeners might have noticed, is really kind of trying to slow
down the news agenda. I think basically they've done some polling which suggests
that people are sick of hearing about politics, don't want to have this sense of
chaos that we've had for really the past few years. And so they've made this
decision not to put ministers up on the morning broadcast rounds every morning,
basically to slow down the news agenda, and they really feel that's working. And
how do you judge her and Rishi Sunak's approach to the BBC? Because some of
their predecessors have made no secret of their hostility towards the BBC on
certain issues. Well, I think they're clearly leaning in to this division over
Gary Lineker and thinking that maybe that can expose a bit of a dividing line
between themselves and Labour. Also, I suppose Amber de Botton is not a BBC
person, even though she's a media person, she was an ICV and a Sky person. I
think that comes through in some small choices around who's given an interview
and so on. And Roger, if I can bring you back in here, another dimension that's
awkward for the BBC here is that it doesn't want to be on one side of an
argument, as Alva's just been describing with reference to this small boat
story. It doesn't want to be having one of its main stars seen as being on one
side or the other. No, I think that's right. And I think the difficulties of the
BBC is that the people lining up to say Lineker must be sacked are not people
that they would instinctively agree with, nor would I. Unfortunately, they do
have some argument about impartiality in the BBC, which the BBC has to take
seriously. And impartiality is difficult because, again, I sympathise very
greatly with Emily Maitlis for her views on the Dominic Cummings thing, but to
me, the script wasn't right. It wasn't quite as impartial as it should be, and
therefore the BBC's complaints process sometimes has to call that out. And
people then say, well, it's a Tory plot. It's not really. It's just that you
will always get political pressures. The BBC has to do the right and independent
thing. And if it's going to be right and independent, it needs to show it's
thoroughly impartial. OK, Roger. Thank you very much indeed. That's Roger Mosey.
Thanks to Alva Ray, who you can listen to on Politico's Westminster Insider
podcast. Thanks for coming in, Alva. Well, next on the Media Show, we're going
to talk about algorithms. We've all become familiar with how algorithms shape
the content that we're offered on social media and on video and audio streaming
services too. And this relationship between algorithm, the people who make the
content, and all of us, the consumers, is fundamental to all of our media
experiences. Put bluntly, the algorithms shape what media we see. And yet,
there's quite a lot we don't know about how they work. It's often far from clear
what the rules of the game are, both for the consumer and for the content
creator. Let's bring in three people who can help us with this, beginning with
Cara Swisher, journalist, host of a couple of hit podcasts, on with Cara Swisher
and Pivot. Cara, great to have you back on the Media Show. Thanks for your time.
Thank you. Does it seem strange to you, as someone who's followed tech for many
years, that this vital element of the media equation, the algorithm, is not
brilliantly understood, either by a consumer or creator? No, it doesn't. I think
that they've tried to make it their secret sauce, as if they're like a Kentucky
fried chicken, what's in it kind of thing. But these things determine a lot of
how we behave, and what influences us, and everything else. And so it's really
important to have transparency around these algorithms and how it's working.
They, of course, again, as I said, they try to protect them vehemently, but they
do have an impact socially, they have an impact politically, and everything
else. And we don't know what they're doing with our data. And so it's very
important to understand how these algorithms are working and make them available
to consumers, so they do understand how they're being manipulated. Well, let's
bring in someone who knows them very well. Noah John Syracuse is Associate
Professor of Mathematics at Bentley University in the States. And Professor John
Syracuse, you're an expert on media algorithms. Do you think those behind them
understand their power? Yeah. I mean, I think one interesting dynamic with these
algorithms is that, as Kara mentioned, there's a lot of complexity and mystery
around them. But at the heart, there's really just kind of a simple math formula
that explains them. And this was what struck me the most. I actually started in
theoretical math and then moved into this more social media algorithm stuff. And
the thing that leapt out is there's basically the same formula that drives
Facebook's algorithm, Instagram, Twitter, and TikTok, even though they're very
different platforms. And the basic idea, you don't need much math background, is
the algorithm uses artificial intelligence to predict what kinds of actions
you're going to do on each post. If you're going to like it, retweet it, share
it, comment on it. And behind the scenes, the engineers assign a certain number
of points to each of these actions. We know a lot about these points for
Facebook because of the whistleblower leak, Frances Haugen. A like was one
point, a comment was 30 points. But other than that leak, we don't know what
these point values are. So for TikTok, we don't know how many points it is to
comment versus watch a video. But there's really just this formula that tries to
see how many points do we think each of these posts or videos will earn from
each user. And whatever post earns the most points is what it'll show us first.
So it's a simple idea. So it's a simple idea, but of course not simple to know
the values being assigned. Let's also bring in Katie Leeson, managing director,
former managing director of Social Chain, which is a social media marketing and
tech company. And Katie, you've recently become CEO of the media division at
Gary Neville's Relentless Group. And it sounds like someone in your job has to
spend your time trying to second guess what the algorithm's doing. Yeah, and it
changes all the time as well. That's the thing. It's very unpredictable. What
they're all doing is watching each other and then changing the algorithms
effectively, because ultimately the main thing is each platform wants you to
stay on there as long as possible. So they will change it, watch what the others
are doing, and then mirror it. So a lot of time when it comes to marketing on
social is spent trying to understand how to hack the algorithm, so to speak. But
that's interesting. They want you to stay, but at the same time they're keeping
you guessing. They want you to stay. It's where they make their advertising
money. So the longer you're on platform, the more likely they are to be able to
serve you the ads, which is the thing that drives the revenue for the platforms.
Yeah, but they don't tell you what it is that's going to keep you there. You
just get served content that they think or the computer thinks you're interested
in. And Cara, tell me about conversations you've had or you've listened into
when media content creators of all sorts, from big operations like international
media organisations right down to individuals, say, come on, tell us more, help
us know the rules of the game. Well, they don't want to tell you. They don't
want to tell you because that's how they manipulate and make their business. To
quote a famous media mogul, Rupert Murdoch, it's not red or blue, it's green.
It's about money and making money. He was talking, obviously, about the lies
that Fox News has been telling around January 6th and more in election denial.
But it's really important to understand that we as a society have – it's as if
advertisers were allowed to do anything at all to manipulate people on radio or
television. This was not allowed. There are rules around advertising all over
the world, a lot of them in the United States too. And in this case, there's no
rules of what they're doing to entice you. And as AI becomes ever more powerful,
it gets even worse because they used to be able to send a million different
messages to a million different people. Now they can just do it endlessly and in
ways that make you feel like you have a relationship with these algorithms. And
so bearing that in mind, Noah, do you think there should be some greater form of
transparency so that anyone who's creating content, who's placing it on these
big platforms, understands the system that they're about to take part in? Yeah,
and I think this is where the shady business aspect comes in. The tech companies
try to hide behind this veil of corporate secrecy that we have proprietary
algorithms, we did all this research, we're entitled to this intellectual
property. But there's so much more they could reveal about the algorithm that
would help us as users have better experiences, help content producers. Just to
give an example, as I mentioned that this basic math formula, they try to
predict what things you'll comment on and like and do these various forms of
engagement, I think they should tell us what types of data they're using to make
these predictions. My gender, my age, my friends on Facebook, if I'm on YouTube,
are they using my Google search history? Even if they don't tell us the secret
sauce recipe of how they make these predictions, the fancy AI that they
developed, just telling us the basic ingredients, what goes into that
prediction, I think that would be fair game. It wouldn't give their competitors
a leg up and it would really help us know what they're listening to and what
they're using to manipulate us. And so that's the look at the equation from the
perspective of content creator. But Katie, what about the consumer? Do you think
there's an appetite from people to understand better why they're being served up
what they're being served? Or do you think actually on the whole people will go
along with however the algorithm's working? I think there's two sides to it.
There's one where you're actually getting served things that you want to watch.
But unfortunately, because the algorithm is a machine, there is a risk with it
as well. And one of my big things is young people not understanding that they're
getting served things that they've watched. So if they're watching something
dangerous to them, the algorithm doesn't know whether that's good or bad.
They'll get served more of that and then they'll trapped in this loop. And that
is really a problem for me. But on the other side of it, you can look at it in a
way where it's very tailored to you and you're getting served things that is
actually very relevant. So say you're into golf and you consume a lot of golf
content, you'll get served more of that, which will keep you in there longer.
But you're right, it's very tricky because we don't know what it is that is
making that algorithm work. And people are very naive to it as well and the
dangers that it can also bring. And I'm struck listening to all three of you,
how much power these platforms have because they're keeping people guessing, but
people are keeping coming back. But Cara, we've talked before on the media show
about Twitter and Elon Musk taking over and it's been striking on that platform
how you see people every day complaining, I used to do this and it did well on
Twitter and now it's not happening and I just have no idea why. Do you think
there's a risk with some platforms that people in the end will get sick of that
experience? Yeah, I mean a bad product is a bad product. Let me just add one
thing. The two things that are critical here is enragement equals engagement.
And so that's why they want to keep you there. That's one part that's really
important. So the constant knowing of what upsets or it's like being at a casino
essentially with the machines. They know which cherry makes you want to push the
button over and over again. The second thing is the addictive nature of it is
the problem, right? Because if you do algorithms right, you get very addicted.
It's not unlike cigarettes, it's not unlike a lot of things that are addictive.
And so it works on our, it crawls down our brainstem and makes us want to click
more. So that's the second. With Twitter, a bad product is a bad product and the
product's getting worse because Elon Musk fired everybody and can't make changes
to the platform or else it collapses. And so that's going to be a problem. The
problem is a lot of people are very addicted to Twitter and they like the
enragement. That's really what's the game there right now. The good thing is
Twitter is real small. I know it isn't to the media and I know it isn't to
politicians, but it's a really small footprint in the world. It has an
influential and loud one, and it's also a terrible, terrible business and has
been for most of its life. And I've got a couple more questions for you about
Elon Musk and Twitter, which we'll get to in a couple of minutes. But Katie,
before I let you go, I just want an insight into how you and your colleagues
work and how you used to work at Social Chain as well. Will you sit down each
day at the beginning of the day with the range of content you might want to put
out there and try and work out, try and pick out the trends of how the
algorithm's working that day, or is that to overstate it? No, not at all. That's
exactly what we did. We had teams of people who were just constantly looking at
what was working and what types of content, for example, now at the minute,
Instagram is preferring people to really learn something from the content that's
on there. So saving of content and sharing it and commenting it is really high
value. So we had people who literally sat there all the time to understand what
was going on on each platform, how to make the most out of it for the content we
were creating for our clients. And so that's quite different from the more
traditional background which you started your career in. Yeah, very much so.
Just buying an ad in a magazine or a newspaper was fairly easy in comparison.
You knew what you were getting. Yeah. I can imagine. And just before, Katie,
thank you. And Noah, before I let you go, too, in terms of the algorithm, is
this something where there's a big policy shift every few months or is this
something that's constantly evolving for the platforms? There's macro changes
that are maybe once a year, every few months, where they really revamp something
substantially, but they're constantly running these experiments, thousands of
experiments every day all the time. If you know medical studies, the best way to
do a medical study is these randomized controlled trials where they split people
into placebo and treatment groups. Well, they have all the users, they have all
the data, they can run endless number of experiments. So that's what they do
nonstop. And they use that data to tweak their product, to tweak their
algorithm, to do as Kara said, to keep people as addicted as possible. They have
a tremendous data supply and they leverage it as much as they can. So there is
an insight into the core, really, of the media experience, certainly through the
big tech platforms. Thank you very much to Noah, John Siracusa from Bentley
University. Thanks to Katie Leeson as well from the Relentless Group. Kara,
you're staying with me just a couple of minutes longer because we've got to talk
about yet another argument that Elon Musk has had on Twitter. This time it was a
Twitter employee who tweeted that he wasn't sure if he'd been sacked or not.
Musk replied, made a number of disparaging comments, including about this man's
health. It then turned out the man had been sacked. He also revealed that he has
muscular dystrophy. And then after a while, Elon Musk apologized again. With any
other CEO, this would be just extraordinary, but somehow this isn't particularly
surprising. Well, he's a troll. I don't know what to say. He was wrong, as
usual. You know, he's frequently wrong, but never in doubt. Most of the time is
an expression we use here in the U.S. And so he attacked someone relentlessly
and quite cruelly. This man has muscular dystrophy. A terrifically regarded
technologist and entrepreneur. Didn't know what he was talking about, as usual.
And then realized he possibly had a lawsuit on his hands, given what he was
saying, with lack of information. I had bad information. Give me a break. He's
twitchy. He's id. He tweets whatever he wants, and he doesn't check. And there's
no consequences for this behavior. And that's gone on for years and years and
years. And how does that saga play into what you're hearing more broadly about
the culture within Twitter and the efforts that Elon Musk is making to change it
as a business and a product? Well, it's not doing well. It never does well. It's
not a new and fresh thing for Twitter, but, you know, he's making it worse.
We'll see if he can cut to the bone to create, you know, a cash flow positive
situation. If it's cash flow positive, that's great. It's been that before. But
he's managed to make it worse, and he's made it into sort of a free-for-all. You
know, he's, of course, bragging about what he's doing and blaming the previous
administration for all the problems that he himself is causing. That's typical
of a badly raised 10-year-old. And so I think that we'll see what happens with
it. Maybe he'll make something out of it. He'll probably try to take it public
again and make some money and get back the overpayment he made, the $44 billion,
by, you know, selling it to the next sucker down the street. And we'll see where
it goes. And just for those listening who didn't follow this exchange, this is
just one of the things that Elon Musk said. He said, the reality is that this
guy, who's independently wealthy, did no actual work, claimed as his excuse that
he has a disability that prevented him from typing, yet was simultaneously
tweeting up a storm. Can't say I have a lot of respect for that. That was a
tweet. Since then, we have an apology. I would like to apologize to Hallie for
my misunderstanding of his situation. It was based on things I was told that
were untrue or in some cases true but not meaningful. He is considering
remaining at Twitter. Now, my question for you here, Cara, is as we see Elon
Musk behaving like this, is this different to the same Elon Musk who you've
reported on for years? Yes. I mean, there was shades of this. He's always trying
to dunk and do things like this. I think he's got about 10% of his personality.
He seemed to have curdled into some sort of weird right-wing trope. I don't
know. As he was doing this, he was insulting one of the officers who was killed
on January 6th. At the same time, he was doing all kinds of misinformation
around this terrible Tucker Carlson program that at least 10 U.S. Republican
senators said was a lie. So he was busy making trouble somewhere else while he
was insulting this guy. Probably a lawyer got to him and said, he now has a
terrific case to sue you. Then he tried to walk it back. It's always in his
self-interest. That's probably why he did it here. He never apologizes unless
there's some risk to him financially. Obviously, we get one view of Twitter
through and Elon Musk through the headlines that he generates. But in terms of
the products, the media product in this case, the Twitter product, can we say
that it's fundamentally shifted because of him being in charge beyond the
headlines? No, he hasn't done anything. There's nothing new. He can't launch
anything. He's not been able to launch Twitter Blue. By the way, all of his
ideas were things that Twitter was working on, so he's probably pulling things
out of the cupboard. Nothing fresh and new has happened here on this platform.
It's just gotten to be a worse experience. Now, a lot of people are addicted to
it, so they'll use it. But we'll see what happens. He's not improved it for
sure. He should probably go back to cars and rockets where he actually has some
expertise and actually makes great products. By the way, Tesla is under siege
because lots of car companies are catching up. Not totally yet because he's
ahead in manufacturing and technology, but they will. There are so many good
cars out there now and at affordable prices. Meanwhile, there was just a new
report that the steering wheels fall off of Teslas. He's got to focus on the
stuff he's good at like cars and the rockets and everything else. That's my
feeling. But he seems to want to troll all day long and thinks that's the best
use of his considerable brain. Just before I let you go, Cara, just two quick
questions. Last time we spoke, you said he'd stopped replying to messages from
you a little while back. Have you heard from him since? No, he called me an
asshole, and I feel like I don't want to talk to someone who emails me that. So
that was that. Yeah, he did it before a couple of years ago, so we'll see. Who
knows? And finally, we were talking about algorithms. You've had a very
successful podcast. Do you rely on algorithms to generate some of that success?
Do you feel exposed? No. No. We rely on doing great storytelling and great
journalism. That's what we rely on. It's really hard. Facebook tried to drag me
into one of their news tests many years ago, and I thought, how does this help
me? No, I didn't do it. I was like, it's a waste of my time. I don't know if
there's any efficacy. Lovely to have you on. Cara, thank you very much indeed.
That's Cara Swisher. Stay tuned for our next two to Roger Mosey, Alva Ray, Noah
John Siracusa and Katie Leeson. We'll be back at the usual time next week. Bye-
bye. The media show was presented by Ross Atkins. The producer was Helen
Fitzhenry, and the studio engineers were Duncan Hannant and Andrew Garrett. BBC
Sounds. Seven years ago, I was filming at East London Mosque when the story
broke. The three schoolgirls from the area had gone missing. They were heading
to Syria to join the Islamic State group. Breaking news this morning. Three
British schoolgirls are reportedly missing. Shamima Begum was the only one of
the girls to emerge from the ashes of the so-called caliphate. I've retraced her
steps from the UK through Turkey and into Syria to find people who knew her and
to investigate the truth of her story. What do you think people think of you? As
a danger, as a risk, as a potential risk. From BBC Radio 4, the Shamima Begum
story, series two of I'm Not a Monster. Listen on BBC Sounds.