TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Click the music tab and scroll to find Kate Bush's Artist Icons collection. BBC
News at seven o'clock. The families of some of the 22 victims of the Manchester
arena bombing have described as devastating the finding that the UK's security
service MI5 missed a significant opportunity to prevent the attack. The chair of
the inquiry Sir John Saunders found that intelligence could have led to the
suicide bomber Salman Abedi being stopped in the days before the Ariana Grande
concert in 2017. The government has said it's committed to learning the lessons
of what it described as this unspeakable tragedy. The head of MI5 Ken McCullum
said he was profoundly sorry the attack wasn't prevented. The independent
reviewer of terror legislation Jonathan Hall KC told the PM programme that the
prospect remains it could happen again. I don't get the impression reading
between the lines that there was some sort of smoking gun like intelligence that
if you'd added together you would have worked out there was a bomb in a flat
which MI5 could then have put surveillance on. I mean the slightly bleak thing
reading this is there's no guarantee that this wouldn't happen again even if the
recommendations that he's going to make in his closed report are accepted. Boris
Johnson has criticised Rishi Sunak's new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. The
former Prime Minister said he'd find it very difficult to vote for the Windsor
framework as he believed it would act as a drag anchor on divergence from the
EU. The number of people confirmed to have died after the train crash in Greece
earlier this week has risen to 57. Rail workers across the country have held a
one-day strike, blaming government neglect of the network for the disaster. The
civil servant in charge of the inquiry into lockdown gatherings at Downing
Street, Sue Gray, has quit the cabinet office. She's been offered the job of
Chief of Staff to the leader of the Labour Party, Sir Keir Starmer. Avon and
Somerset police are appealing for dashcam footage of a tipper truck colliding
with a gantry on the M5 this morning. The incident near Bristol closed the
motorway between junctions 17 and 18 in both directions for the entire day.
Engineers are assessing the damage. BBC News. Music education in the UK has been
in decline for years. We've actually seen an overall decrease in the number of
schools that are offering those qualifications. It's decreased by about 35% over
the last 10 years. But music plays an important part in our lives, from the
classroom. It's very good for the emotional well-being of children. To the
economy. We want to be doing as well as we possibly can do because this island
exports so much music across the whole of the world. I'm Soweto Kinch, a
musician, and I'm finding out what needs to be done to keep UK music alive.
Rethinking Music on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds starts next Tuesday morning at 11.30.
Well, after the government's rethink of arrangements for trade in Northern
Ireland, David Aronovich and his guests will be taking a closer look at the
Windsor Framework published earlier this week. The briefing room is at eight
o'clock. And after that, how is technology changing recruitment? Have the
traditional tools, the CV, the interview, had their day? Join Evan Davis for the
bottom line at half past eight. But now on Radio 4 in the Arches, Chelsea has an
important interview of her own as she's struggling to prepare. What's the time?
Just turned five. It's less than two hours till the interview start and I still
ain't got a subject for my tour. I don't know what your problem is, Chelsea.
There's plenty about Laura Loxley in here. Yeah, none of it's interesting
though. Oh, I wouldn't say that. What are you going to talk about then, Uncle
Neil? When Sir Edwin Padgeter raised troops to fight the Cumberland forces
against the Jacobite rebellion. That's what I mean. Boring. What about the house
being used as a hospital for soldiers coming back from the Somme? War again. The
gardens being laid out by Perspicacity Taylor. Well, look, you need to find
something and quick. Yeah, I know. Or you're going to find this interview a bit
of an embarrassment. Well, Uncle Neil, stop. Go back a bit. Yeah, there. He's a
looker, isn't he? Well, I suppose so. Quite dashing, you might say. And she's
gorg. That dress is lush. Though, no. What? I can't do a rate my selfie on an
oil painting, can I? That's not what Freddie will be wanting. Come on through,
Alice. It's nearly ready. Thanks. Oh, hello. Hi, Alice. All right. Oh, sorry. I
didn't mean to interrupt you. Alice has come to collect my offering for the
buffet. For the funeral. Yeah, that's right. Oh, well, it's no problem. We can
carry on in the lounge, can't we? Oh, yeah, totally. I hope it, you know, goes
all right tomorrow, Alice. Oh, thank you. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Now, there's two
people. I was quite surprised when I heard the wake was going to be at the ball.
I thought Brian would have wanted something posher, like the golf club or Lower
Locksley. Oh, no, no. We all agreed there couldn't be a better place because Mum
grew up there. Oh, of course. That makes sense now I think about it. It's the
ideal venue, isn't it? We thought so. And people can just walk there from the
church. Yeah. And how are you doing yourself after last week? I'm a lot better.
Thanks, Susan. I am pleased. You were such a help. I've been talking a lot to
Lisa, my support buddy. Oh. And Chris has been brilliant too. That's good to
hear. You have to remember a lot of people care about you, Alice. Yeah, I
realise that. Anyway, what have you made for our centrepiece? Yes, well, I
thought I'd do one of your mum's classic recipes, avocado and asparagus terrine.
Oh, Dad loves that. Obviously, it won't compare to the original, but I thought,
well, it'd be a nice tribute to Jennifer. Couldn't be better. The tin's just
been loosening in some hot water. It just needs turning out. Oh, great. So if I
just... Oh, my goodness. Oh, no. Oh, dear. Well, that's not how I remember it.
What have I done? I really don't know. Not enough gelatine? Maybe. Or perhaps I
didn't leave it in the fridge long enough. Well, I'm sure it tastes fine. Could
we put it in bowls and call it a dip? Oh, no. It's a disaster. Oh, I'm so sorry.
And the towns and villages of Borsichurch still contain descendants of the men
who marched with their Colonel Edwin Parditor in 1745. I have to say, that was
very good. Oh, thank you, Freddie. There's just one thing I wasn't clear about.
Yeah? Were they actually involved in any fighting that year? No, because Charles
Edward Stuart's army turned back at Derby. Perhaps because they believed that
strong forces were heading to intercept them, including Freddie's ancestor.
Yeah, I'm sure that was part of it, Nodutando. Okay, um, Neil, could you give us
a few minutes to have a chat? Oh, yes, of course. Just take a seat outside.
Right you are. We'll be with you very soon. Help yourself to tea or coffee. Oh,
I will, thanks. Yes, okay. I won't say we told you so. You were right. And Lily
was. If you hadn't upset her so much, she might have been helping with this. I
probably need to say sorry. I know Neil's not young and funky, but he'd be a
very safe pair of hands. Oliver, too. He was pretty hot in all that military
stuff. So much better than poor Fleur. Not that we expected her to do well at
this. We gave her a go though, anyway. Important to show you're giving equal
treatment to all the possible trainees. Exactly. Including Chelsea Horribin. I
don't know what all the fuss is about. There's one on a house in our road. You
can't hardly see it. No, Chelsea. This isn't just one charging point. It's a
whole charging station. There's going to be dozens of those things. And not just
that. They're applying for permission for a shop and a cafe on the site as well.
So customers have got something to do while their car's charging. Sounds to me
like it's going to be a mini motorway services. I didn't realise. So not only is
it going to be a blot on the landscape, it's going to be competition for all the
existing businesses in the area. What, like the village shop you mean? Yeah, and
the one at Bridge Farm. The tea room. Maybe even the bull. But does that mean
there'll be new jobs at this, like, station? Well, I suppose so. But local
businesses have been finding things a real struggle this last year. Two more
places all chasing the same customers. It might be the straw that breaks the
camel's back. Yeah, no wonder Susan's been having a mare about it. Okay,
Chelsea, we're ready for you now. Oh, it's all right. It's all right. Will you
come in with me, Neil? Um, well, would that be okay, Noletando? Yeah, I guess,
if that's what Chelsea would prefer. Yeah, please, I would. Then I can't see any
problem with it. Come on in. Look, you really don't need to worry. You've picked
a good story. Yeah, I hope so. And they're not trying to catch you out. Chelsea
wants Neil to sit in. That's all right, isn't it? Yeah, of course, as long as
you're happy with it, Neil. Oh, yes, that's fine by me. Sit down, both of you.
Hey, thanks, Freddie. Make yourself comfortable. Thank you. So, as Neil has
already heard, the purpose of this initial session is for us to get a feel for
your personal style and how you'll engage with the sort of material that you'll
be working with if you eventually become a Lower Loxley tour guide. Yeah. So,
Chelsea, what have you chosen to talk about today? Okay, right, um, yeah, so
what it is, it's not ancient history. That's fine. It's like, like, 1940s. Go
on. And it's dead romantic. Sounds interesting. Yeah, it is, because it's the
story of how young Gerald Parget had told his family where to get off, because
he'd fallen in love with, like, a showgirl, a dancer, and even though they were
dead against it, he wasn't having any, and in the end, he only went and married
her. It just came out in a horrible mess. I really don't know what I did wrong.
I did try to tell Susan not to worry about it, but she insisted on us coming
over. I just had to apologise to you in person, Brian. Yes. I couldn't leave it
till tomorrow. That wouldn't have been right at all. Look, I'm sure Alice is
right. It's not the end of the world. But I feel terrible about it. You were
relying on me, and I've let you down. Oh, don't say that. We've all had our
share of kitchen disasters. It can happen to anyone. But this is so important.
So I know it's not the same, but, well, if you can suggest something you'd like,
Brian, I'll go to the supermarket now and buy it. No, no, you don't have to. I
know it's not really right to get something shop-bought. I mean, Jennifer would
be turning... Well, it's not her sort of thing at all, but I can't see any other
option. It's fine, really. Lots of people are providing food. We won't go short.
But this was going to be the centrepiece. I'm sure we can find something else.
Did you say centrepiece? Yes. Well, I'm not sure, but actually, I might have a
solution. And against all his family's worries, and all their dire warnings,
Gerald and Julia stayed happily married until he died over 30 years later. So
that's it. Well done, Chelsea. Ta-ta. And thanks for helping me with it. No, no,
no, it was your work. So, what do you think? No, I mean, you're right, Neil. It
was very good, Chelsea. Thanks. Perhaps we might need to talk about the best way
to phrase certain things, choice of words and so on. But it was very engaging.
I'll say, you really made it come alive. There were just a few things I wondered
about. You know this is my grandfather, Gerald. Yeah, I guess. When you said he
climbed over the fence at Bridlington to go and see Julia, my grandmother,
perform, are you sure about that? Well... Well, because he was an officer. So I
think he probably could have just walked out the front gate. Yeah, well, I did
say just imagine him doing that. I see. So that meant it was actually you
imagining it. Well, yeah, kind of. But it's the sort of thing they did in those
days, innit? Nolotando? Did you imagine the presents he gave her too? Oh, no,
that would defo right, because I checked with Freddie's mum. And the dress she
wore at the wedding. I saw it in the photograph. Right. Well, do you know, I
think you actually make a really good double act. With two of us, you mean?
You've got really complimentary style. As I say, it will take quite a lot of
work. But with your thoroughness and Chelsea's energy... I certainly think we
could move on to the next stage of the training. Oh, that's awesome. No, not at
all. But no thanks. I'm sorry, what? I don't want the job. But you've just...
It's all so boring. No offence, but that story was the one interesting thing I
could find about the whole flipping place. Chelsea! And if you think I'll do all
that work and not get paid for it, you need your head examined. Again, no
offence. None taken. I just wanted to prove I could do it. And now I have. My
work here is done. That's a very well stocked freezer. Ah, here it is. Oh, wow,
that's big. Lamb, leek and prune pie. Eat hot or cold. Obviously, it'll have to
be defrosted. Well, do that overnight. No problem. I know it's not the same
thing as you were making, Susan. Oh, no, that's all right. As long as there's a
centrepiece, that's what's important. Who brought you that? Was it one of Linda
Snell's? No, no, your mother made it. Jennifer? Not long before she died. Oh,
Dad. I didn't really think about it until now. But I'd really like it to be part
of the buffet. Oh, yes, absolutely. Oh, there couldn't be anything better. Oh,
I'm sorry, Susan, I didn't mean... No, it's perfect. And like you said, I can
probably turn the terrain into a deep. What is it? It's actually quite funny
when you think about it. Who else but Mum could be so organised that she's
contributing to our own funeral tea? And tomorrow evening, friends and family
pay tribute to Jennifer when we return to Ambridge at seven. ChatGPT is the
artificial intelligence technology that seems to be everywhere. It's an
extraordinary phenomena. It's burst on the scene. I'm Laura Lewington and I'm
going to see what ChatGPT can do. This is going to happen. We need to learn how
to use this technology effectively. Can it write good essays, suggest holidays
or simply change our daily lives? All of the ethical questions that concern us
when we think about using AI, they're right at the centre in the use of GPT. And
can it even make a radio programme? Find out in a documentary by ChatGPT next
Monday evening at eight o'clock on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. This is BBC Radio 4.
Now it's time for Front Row with Shahida Bari. Hello. Friendships can be intense
at the best of times, but it's probably that much more complicated if you're in
a band with more than just creative differences. Just ask Fleetwood Mac or Daisy
Jones and the Six, the fictional 70s rock band at the centre of a glossy new
series. But it's confusion and heartbreak for Leo and Remy, the two 13-year-old
boys growing up in rural Belgium, when their friendship is torn asunder in Lucas
Dons' prize-winning film Close. Music journalist Kate Mossman and film critic
Tim Robeat will be reviewing both for us today. Also in the programme, a
retrospective on the work of modernist potter Lucy Rhee. Her fans include the
artist Edmund Duval, who's here to talk us through the show, and well, someone
else whose voice you might just recognise. Lovely pink. And this jewel-like
green. It is always different colour. Sometimes it's much bluer. Oh, that's
lovely, emerald-y green. And perfectly there. Oh, that's a stunner, isn't it?
David Attenborough enthusiastically profiling Lucy Rhee for an episode of the TV
arts programme Omnibus in 1982. We're starting, though, with Daisy Jones and the
Six, Amazon Prime's 10-part series detailing the struggles of a scrappy 70s rock
band from Pittsburgh, the Six. It's only when they're persuaded to join forces
with the dreamy Daisy Jones, a troubled, wayfish, bangle-jangling singer-
songwriter, that they find themselves with a hit on their hands. Sam Claflin
plays Billy Dunn, the shaggy-haired, heartthrob and guitar-playing frontman who
clashes with the magnetic Daisy, played by Riley Keough. Can I ask you a
question? What do you think the song's about? What do I think the song is about?
What the song that I wrote? What do I think the song that I wrote is about? It's
about starting a new life, Daisy. It's about redemption. Redemption from what?
From letting people down. So guilt. It's about guilt. No, it's not about guilt.
I'm sorry, I'm not trying to pry or anything. I'm just trying to, you know, get
us on the same page and understand the story better so that I can help, which
is, I think, that's why I'm here. I'm assuming it's about you. Okay, so you let
somebody down, right? And now you're saying, you know, everything's fine, look
at us now, everything's in the past, nothing. Yeah, what's wrong with that? I
don't believe it, and it doesn't sound honest, and it sounds simple. And I don't
know you very well. You don't seem simple to me. Daisy Jones and the Six, then.
Based on the novel by Taylor Jenkins-Reed, which was inspired by the rumours and
romances that plagued 70s superband Fleetwood Mac. The series, like the novel,
takes the form of a behind-the-scenes documentary, the story interspersed with
interviews with the band some 20 years afterwards. It features original music
for the fictional band, too. Kate, did you dig it, as one of the cast members
might say? I didn't dig the first couple of episodes, but I became rather hooked
at four or five. I do think that music's one of the corniest art forms to try
and portray on screen, and I've been thinking about why. And a lot of that is to
do with the fact that the process of songwriting is a completely interior
process, and there's no way you can show it unless you reach for a great variety
of cliches. For instance, you know, a paisley scarf hung over a lamp, somebody
going like, what about these chords, guys? I think I've got it. Yeah, yeah, we
had quite a lot of that. There's a lot of that going on, and there's a lot more.
It's the usual story of sex, drugs and rock and roll, Tim. Did it hit the right
note with you? Not really. I listened to the whole of Fleetwood Mac's Rumours on
my way here, which you could probably safely say is all killer, no filler. And
this show is some killer, a lot of filler. A lot of filler, especially the first
two episodes, as Kate says. There's just so much preamble before you even get to
what you want, which in fact is the scene we just heard. We were dying for Daisy
to meet. You really are, yeah. And the other thing that it kept making me think
of was Almost Famous, because part of the reason it's so popular is partly
because Sam Cloughlin's character is so much like Billy Crudup's character in
Almost Famous, the kind of rock god who's self-destructive and so on. And Almost
Famous, you know, it's not the most groundbreaking, earth-shaking portrait of
that era ever, but it's very entertaining. And it does everything in two hours
20. It's a film that just packs it all in. And I just don't understand why this
had to be a 10-part miniseries. I think it's, that's the times we're in. I think
back then it would have been a film. Did the format work? Because the original
novel was written in the form of an oral history of the band, and here it's a
behind-the-scenes documentary. Did that work? I mean, I don't think it really
does, because the other characters are so thinly sketched, really. And you get
there kind of, they're looking back at everything that went wrong in a very
shallow way. And you really want it to dig into that main relationship with the
greatest respect to the other members of Fleetwood Mac. This particular portrait
is about those two. And I think you just want it to dive in straight in. Well,
okay, Daisy Jones and the Six are supposed to be one of the greatest bands of
the 70s. So they need to have some pretty fantastic music to live up to that.
What did you make of the music? It takes a while to kick in. First, I thought,
you know, it's terrible. He said, this is a song, and he plays a son of a
preacher man. And you can't just play other people's fantastic songs. But the
songs are written by people like Jackson Brown, Phoebe Bridges, and they are
really good. And they're very subtle. And they really pack a punch. But the
problem is that they don't, they are sort of pastiche in the sense that they're
loaded with this kind of mid 70s grandeur, but they don't have the evocative
power of those original songs, because songs are about bringing back the memory
of where you were at that time, what was going on in culture, who these
fantastic iconic figures were who was singing them. So you're always going to
get this sense of it's a bit like dress up. It's a bit like stars in their eyes,
or starstruck, as I should say now. But it is carried completely by the
relationship at the centre between Kathleen and Keo, which is, I just think it's
fantastic. I was a big fan of Nashville. Right. And other country music, country
music show, and and that had a great sort of romantic duo at the centre. Let's
talk about that in a moment. But let's hear a little of the music right now. The
track Look at Us Now, Honeycomb, written not by the fictional Billy and Daisy,
but the film's songwriter, Blake Mills. Riley Keo is, people might know, the
granddaughter of Elvis. She's performing the songs herself, as is Sam Claflin.
How persuasive did you find them and their rendering of that music? I loved the
fact that they set up the two dueling frontmen. I mean, as much as it was about
a romance between a man and a woman, it was also about two people wanting to be
at the front of the band. And it looked at frontman personalities. There's
always an absent parent, there's a desperate need to prove yourself every
morning. There's a brittleness, like no one will stand up to them. You didn't
mind those cliches or tropes? No, I like that. I think that's true. I've
interviewed a few of them. I think that is really there. And I think that they
got this chemistry fantastically because they're sharing a microphone, and one
of them will shut their eyes and really sort of lean into the song, and the
other one will just peep at them across the top of the mic, and it's really
sexy. We're not literally sharing a microphone, but I'll jump in here as well. I
mean, I do think those performances are the things that threatened to drag me
into the show. Those two, and actually not just those two. The actress who plays
Billy's wife, Camilla Moroney, I think is a real standout in this. She's left
pregnant on the sidelines, basically. He goes off on tour and is unfaithful, and
he goes off and has his wild sex and drugs and rock and roll years, as it were,
without her there, which I think is a little bit cowardly on the show's part
because if you're going to do it, then show it. Tim, I feel like you should let
the show drag you in. I think you're just on the cusp. Eventually, I'm on the
cusp because I've reached the point where it gets interesting. It just takes so
long. Yeah. And I do resist a show that is this baggy, kind of keeping me
waiting so long. What about, what about Riley Keough is sauntering around in a
lot of crocheted halter neck tops. Billy's girlfriend, who you mentioned,
Camilla, has poker straight Cher hair, the men are shaggy, there are smoky dive
bars, ramshackle LA everywhere. Do they capture the look of 70s LA effectively?
I like the costumes. I like the pool parties. I mean, we've seen, we have sort
of seen it all before, but I'm fine hanging out there. But I really need those
personalities to come through. And luckily, Riley Keough is fantastic. I mean,
I've, I've been watching her for years in films, and she's been very good lately
in films like Zola, American Honey, but this is a great part for her when it
finally comes into focus. And I think she's very good at doing a kind of
mischievous perspective back on what what was going on back then. She's she's
the best at the interview stuff when you've got her looking straight down the
camera lens saying, well, here's how it really went. I think she's an amazing, I
mean, she looks like Elvis. And then when she sings in the apparent 70s, there's
a certain facade. I mean, Kate, I found that quite electric and such a
convincing performer and that she's got this hard, hard shell. And you see, you
do see a little bit how it formed and the defensiveness and the vulnerability
underneath. I just think it's great. And it does carry it. I think it's worth
watching for those two. And you believe her as a waitress, you believe her as a
waitress, even though she's a classic nepo baby in a way, but she actually is
very good at acting that. Can I can I ask you, Kate, about Nabiya B, who plays
Daisy's disco diva friend Simone, who's one of the African-American characters,
and there's another, the band's manager, Teddy. Teddy Price. I did wonder about
having a series focusing on the 70s music scene in which black music is only
given a supporting act. It's true. It's like they get it in and then she moves
to New York, doesn't she? So she's off the scene very quickly. What I did like
was the film, the show really makes this very charming effort to kind of write
decades of sexist writing that puts all female characters in opposition with
each other. So all the women in it are lovely to each other. Oh, welcome to the
band. Come into our family. And there's none of that kind of rivalry, even
though one of them's having an affair with the other one's husband. It's very
sweet that where they've tried to kind of rewrite that sort of writing. And I
did really like Riley resisting this moment where one of the male singer
songwriters calls her his muse. And she just absolutely bridles against that
because that cliche is just will not stand. I'm sorry. And she's like, I'm so
much more than that. I'm sorry. And so she sort of makes an escape for it. Yeah,
I wondered about this, Tim. It's because I do. I'm sort of on the side of it. It
is entertaining. I'm not sure how far it addresses anything really serious about
the music industry and fame. Yeah, I agree. And I do think that, as you say, the
black musician on the sidelines is a bit like Babylon recently, which had the
jazz trumpeter who was totally sidelined as a bit of an apologetic role. And
she's also the one who gets the sleazy producer moment, doesn't she? So there
aren't any predatory producers so far apart from given to her. And it's dealt
with very quickly, parceled up, and then she's moved off to New York and it sort
of ends her career, but you know, ends her career in LA. She's great. Are we
entering a new age of musical biopics, Kate? Recent films about Queen, Elton
John and Whitney Houston have had actors taking on the roles of these
instrumentalists and singers. Taryn Edgerton learned bits in the better commas
of piano to play Elton. Naomi Aki's vocals were dubbed in part. I mean, she's
playing Whitney after all. What do you think? I think it's a good time. And I
think there are, you know, for instance, we mentioned Nashville before, long
running series that take music very seriously and have to get the writing right.
And I've seen some terrible biopics in the day where they couldn't even get the
rights for the songs. So you'll get a, well, there was a Jimi Hendrix movie that
had no Jimi Hendrix music in it. And they're very careful these days to get the
songwriting right and to really get under the bonnet of the kind of the studio.
Just quickly, will you both be keep watching? I might give it one more episode.
Keep going, I say. I'm going to watch it tonight. Yeah, definitely. I've been
sneaking into my lunch hour. Daisy Jones and The Six is streaming on Amazon
Prime from tomorrow. Thank you, Tim and Kate. And you're staying with us, aren't
you, to talk about Close in a moment. Now, she said that her dream was to be a
sculptor, but then she discovered the adventure of pottery. Lucy Rhee was born
in Vienna in 1902 to an affluent Jewish family. Forced to flee Nazi Austria in
1938, she settled in London, where she set up her home and studio. Her work,
refined tableware, distinctively shaped bowls and vases with innovative glazes,
was her own version of modernist pottery and influenced generations of British
and American potters. She was made a dame of the British Empire in 1991 before
her death in 1995 at the age of 93. Over the decades, her work has been
periodically recognised in various exhibitions, including one at the V&A in
1980, and now a retrospective at Kettle's Yard in Cambridge. Master potter
Edmund Duval has written an essay for the show's catalogue. Edmund, welcome to
Front Row. Thank you. Very nice to be here. Well, the show is called The
Adventure of Pottery. Just how adventurous is she as a potter? She's
extraordinarily adventurous. She begins really in places that you may not think
pottery should begin. We all expect pottery to be kind of, perhaps to have a
robustness to it or kind of have the colours of the earth around them. But she
begins in a completely different place. And her adventure, which takes her into
all kinds of territory in terms of form, in terms of glazing, in terms of
meaning of pots, is really very radical. It was radical right from the
beginning. That's what's so extraordinary about this fearsome, wonderful,
wonderful artist. For those of us who don't know her work, what can we expect to
see from her in this show? And are there standout pieces, as it were? This is a
retrospective, so you will see everything, actually. But what you'll see is in
some ways different phases of her life. You'll see the early parts from Vienna
with their great sort of volcanic pitted glazes that she makes when she's
setting out to become this independent woman in complicated Vienna. And then
you'll see this great phase of her button making, which we must talk about in
London as an émigré trying to make a living during the war here in her new city.
And that's an extraordinary phase of her life. And then she does absolutely
wonderful and radical act, which is to make tableware, which sounds, you know,
my goodness, what a conventional thing for a potter to do. But she rethinks what
metropolitan, urban, sophisticated people might actually want. And so she makes
coffee cups of the most exquisite kind of balance with these fine lines in them.
She makes pots which are for a kind of sophisticated metropolitan living. And
they're urban pots. Well, I'm not very sophisticated, but I looked through the
catalogue and I just thought the stuff was just eminently covetable. I wanted
everything. It's so beautiful. You have a family connection to Reed, don't you?
Did you ever meet her in person? I met her. My grandmother, who was Viennese,
also Jewish, Viennese family, and she had cousins in common. And so they both
were exiles 1938 and 1939 from the Nazis, from the Anschluss. And they knew each
other a little bit in the UK. But I met her and was terrified by her. And I
think it's kind of important because, you know, you see photographs of this
diminutive, elegant woman dressed in white and you hear the stories of her
extraordinary hospitality and generosity. And maybe at that moment, you might
forget just how fearsome she is. Fearsome because she sets out on this path of
making pots in a context of contemporary design in Vienna and makes her mark
very early, becomes very well known in 1930s Europe. Yes. She reinvents herself
in exile in London. And then extraordinarily, she goes through these different
phases of rethinking, rethinking what these vessels might mean. And you can't
condescend. You should never condescend in the presence of Lucie Reed because
she has this sort of adamantine quality of... It's curious you describe her that
way because in the omnibus documentary, there's David Attenborough, you know,
recognisable David Attenborough, lean, handsome and young, next to this tiny
bird-like woman. But you do also get the sense of a certain steel too. I think
that you describe her work in the essay as austere, but also that many of the
pieces have a sensuousness. What do you mean by that? So when you pick them up,
there's a balance to them. They are exquisitely made. When you pick up a cup, it
floats up into the air. It's quite extraordinary. But actually, when you look at
her glazes, when you feel the glazes, they have much more of a resemblance to
really to the texture of cloth or leather or lacquer. They've got these strange
sort of tactile moments. Or else they have these very fine inscribed lines,
these wonderful parallel lines that she inscribes into the clay, which give them
a kind of precision. When you pick them up, you run your hands round and round
and round and don't really ever want to put them down. They're very, very
seductive. I'm desperate to drink from a Lucie Reed teacup now, Edmund. You
mentioned her Viennese origins and she was working there through the early
decades of European modernism in the 20s and 30s. Was she influenced by the
culture emerging there? Absolutely. So she comes into her sort of adult working
life surrounded by modernist architecture, by Josef Hoffmann, the great radical
architect of Vienna. And she makes pots in those early years, which are entirely
for those beautiful spaces, those sort of cadenced spaces in Vienna. So you have
to imagine uncluttered spaces, beautiful veneered doors, extraordinary glass
windows. And so there is that feeling of making pots for very particular
situations. And indeed, and this is so wonderful, she designs and has designed
her own flat and apartment by a great architect, which extraordinarily, when
she's forced to flee by the Nazis, she packs up this flat and re-erects it in
London. A little bit like Freud, I imagine. Exactly like Freud. And they're all,
everyone knows each other. Yeah, and she's in that circle, or her father was.
You said that when she heads to London in 1938, she carries some of her pots in
her hand luggage. And then she sets up the studio in Marble Arch, I think,
building up this repertoire of tableware and vases. And she also falls into the
circle of British potters like Bernard Leach. What effect does that have on her
work? Well, there's an extraordinary encounter very early on with Leach. Leach
is the sort of the godfather and grandfather of English pottery, and comes from
an oriental tradition of much heavier making. And at the beginning, Leach cannot
understand her work, and dislikes it and says, you're making these pots wrongly,
they don't work. And thank goodness, she disregards him. And gradually, they
actually become friends, they become great friends and great admirers of each
other over the years. But she never turns down that ruralist avenue. She always
remains true to this idea of a precise making, of an alignment of pots with
architecture. Well, shall we find out a little bit about her technique? Lucy
Rhee uses one particularly distinctive style of decoration that immediately
identifies a pot as hers. In a way, it's a very risky one. One slip of the hand,
and the pot is ruined. She starts by painting the raw, unfired clay with an
oxide, in this case, manganese that will fire to a rich chocolate brown, and
then scratches lines through it. This is very characteristic of many of your
pots, this particular technique. I was in Avebury, there in the museum, I saw
prehistoric little black pots with the white lines, and they did these little
pots, sketched it with bird bones. So I tried it at home. And you now use a
needle? Yes, I always use the needle. I almost can't speak, it seems to me
I'm... Oh yes, you can. You do it entirely by eye, you don't measure anything?
Yes. Isn't that wonderful? David Attenborough there, speaking to Rhee in her
studio for an episode of Omnibus in 1982. He also collects her work, Edmund. I
wonder if that means there's something elemental or a natural quality to her
work that speaks to someone like him? I think when you go to this exhibition,
you look at this book, there are wonderful swirling glazes that look like rock
formations. There's the pittedness of the glazes, which are like corals or
sponges. Lava, he says at one point in the documentary. But, you know, just
listening to her is like listening to my grandmother, I have to say, there's the
rolling Rs. But when you hear that encounter between Attenborough and Rhee,
you're also hearing this extraordinary concision, you know, her responses.
There's nothing wasted in that encounter at all. And that concision is
absolutely the heart of this artist. Am I right to say that Attenborough is
potty about pottery? Has he collected any of your work? I'm not sure he's got
any of mine. He's a huge and great collector and great supporter of Studio
Ceramics over the years. Yeah, it's interesting, isn't it? Tell me a bit more
about her technique, because she uses something called scraffito. Scraffito.
Scraffito. What is that? Scraffito is simply picking up, simply, it's nothing
simple about it at all. It's picking up a needle and scratching through one
glaze or one slip, one liquid bit of pottery into another. And it's freeform for
her. It's freeform. And so, you know, and so if you imagine the radius of a bowl
and then picking it up and then freeform, just one line and then another, and
she never gets it wrong. They have this beautiful sort of breathing in and
breathing out quality of these beautiful, impeccable lines. It's mesmerising to
watch her in the Omnibus episode. Let's talk about the buttons, which you've
already mentioned, because the Japanese designer Issey Miyake picks them up for
a collection in the 80s. They're quite, quite exquisite, aren't they? It's
extraordinary. So, I mean, because her technique is so great to make money
during the war, she makes buttons for couturiers and a couturier would come with
a green coat and say, I need 24 buttons by Tuesday. And she'd just invent
beautiful buttons for this and deliver them. And they are extraordinary. And she
made thousands of them. Miyake discovers this, falls in love with her, takes her
work to Japan and makes one of the most extraordinary exhibitions of her work
and uses the buttons in his own fashion. And then more latterly, the great,
wonderful fashion designer Jonathan Anderson has done exactly the same. He's
sort of picked her up, her buttons up and is now making them part of his own
work too. She was interested in Asian traditions of pottery too, wasn't she? How
visible is that in her work? I think it's there in the more minimal work. So, I
have to say, I make white bowls. She makes the white bowls. Go to Kettle's Yard
and see a bowl and you will actually see something which really sings in a way
that a sort of a Chinese bowl of the 12th century might sing. It has this
nothing extraneous to it at all. It has a beautiful profile. It has a living
profile. You feel the hands and you feel the thinking behind it. Absolutely
exquisite. You spoke rather touchingly of your grandmother. She reminds you of
your grandmother. She was a female potter working in the 20th century. Was that
rare and did that shape the work that she produced in any way? There are many
more female potters than history and my God, the critics have allowed. So,
there's a great act of sort of cultural reclamation going on, recognising how
many and how significant they are. But Reeves stands out even amongst this
growing understanding of how important women are in ceramics. Has she influenced
you, Edmund? Of course she has. How? Tell me how. I think in several ways. One,
the decision to come off my Welsh hillside and stop making casseroles and think
about making pots in a London studio. That's been very important. But also,
she's an exile and so much of my work has been to do with displacement and she
managed to make it work. Just lastly, it's going to be interesting to see her
work in a domestic setting like Kettle's Yard, which is a home essentially
turned over to art. I wonder if you can see her pottery as part of a whole
aesthetic of architecture, textile, buttons and furniture too? Absolutely you
can. Kettle's Yard is the perfect place because there's a loosey-wee bowl and
you look inside and there are some beautiful pebbles inside that jar or that
vase or that bowl and that's exactly how she would have thought her work should
be placed. Oh, I'm so glad and now that's a strong recommendation to go and
visit the show at Kettle's Yard too. Thank you so much, Edmund Duval. Lucy Ree,
The Adventure of Pottery, is on at Kettle's Yard in Cambridge from the 4th of
March to the 25th of June. Now, we turn to Close, the latest film from Belgian
filmmaker Lucas Dant. It won the Grand Prix in May at the Cannes Film Festival
and is up for Best International Film at the Oscars too. Set in the Belgian
countryside, the film examines the tender and fragile friendship between two
seemingly inseparable 13-year-old boys, Leo, played by Aidan Dombryn and Remy,
played by Gustave de Wala. They ride bikes through fields of flowers and whisper
stories to each other at night, sleeping with limbs entangled. But at school,
the nature of their relationship is questioned by others. Soon after, Leo begins
to push Remy away with devastating consequences. A warning, the film has already
garnered a reputation for leaving audiences in floods of tears. I wanted to show
intimacy, said Dant, in a young, masculine universe. Tim, it's won the Grand
Prix at Cannes, is being touted at the Oscars. Does it deserve the acclaim? I
really think it does. I've seen it twice. I saw it in Cannes and refreshed,
watched it this week again. And even on the second time, I still wasn't prepared
for the kind of emotional violence of it, even though I knew it was going to
happen. You sort of pray it's not going to happen. And you sort of got at it
when you said that, you know, they're seemingly inseparable, but what is going
to cause this friendship to break and what pressures is it going to come under?
That scene that we just heard is the very first moment in the film where there's
any question thrown at them about what is the nature of this friendship. And it
just causes things to be ripped apart in the most tenderly, brutal way. I found
myself kind of physically clenching myself during the scenes where the two boys
fight and when they pull away from each other and even worse things happen. It's
beautifully done. The bewilderment on their beautiful young faces as well is
terribly affecting. Kate, what did you make of the performances from Aidan
Dombrin and Gustave Douala? I just thought it was an incredible portrait of love
before you know what love is, in the sense there's a, my favourite moment,
there's an aerial scene of them arriving at school and it's like watching two
gazelles or foals walk into a jungle. It's not a nasty school, but it's like,
you know, they're different creatures and they've got, they're sort of protected
by their friendship. They've got this detached amusement and closeness and
they're not haughty, but they're always laughing or suppressing a laugh. And
it's got a sense of, it gives you a sense of being so close to someone that it's
almost like part of your own body, it's beyond a brother kind of thing. And so
when the sort of, we'll call it the rupture, happened, I was so upset that I was
quite angry for a lot of the film and I just wished that I could have seen a
little bit more of this friendship because I thought it was extremely original
the way it was done and very tender and very modern and different from what I've
seen done before in terms of... The way that friendship is constructed in those
early scenes is fascinating to him. It's ravishingly beautiful to watch, we
should say, not just because the boys are so young and tender-faced, but because
Leo's family work on a farm. So there's these endless shots of fields and
flowers and the boys racing down these sunlit country lanes. But it's also
called close and the boys too are filmed very close up. I found that incredibly
effective. Yeah, I do think the photography is quite excellent here and I think
there's a danger of us in spelling out the themes of the film and there are
themes about masculine emotion, teenage, the intensity of teenage kind of
hormonal bonds and so on. But to spell them out like that, it's almost like
we're in danger of trampling across the flower field ourselves in a way because
the film does speak so eloquently for itself. But like Kate, I have been
grappling a little bit with how early the rupture in the film happens because
there's something so special about what's going on before it. Well, we're
calling it rupture, we should just let our audience know that something very
significant happens in the plot about halfway through, something very traumatic.
But I think it's even less than halfway. It happens shockingly early. It's about
30 minutes in. You won't be prepared for it. People won't be prepared for how
soon it happens. It left the critics at Cannes sobbing wrecks apparently. Does
it risk being a bit sensationalist? I don't know about that. I think he wants to
look at, I mean, it's not just about potentially gay teenagers before they've
realized they're gay. That's not the thing. I think anyone of any gender or
orientation probably will remember a friendship at school they may have had,
which was endangered by group dynamics, where you suddenly realized, I'm not
going to be popular if I hang out with this person any longer, or they're saying
things about me, this can't work out. And those people who get kind of cast
adrift when you're at that age. And I think he manages to tap into that as well,
really in a very universal way, which I think is very powerful. I think it's
interesting that Tim here is saying that, you know, it's not really a film about
sexuality. The boys are 13 years old, they're prepubescent. And it's not clear
at all that they're gay. It's not Call Me By Your Name by any means this film,
it's not a film about sexual desire. But is it correct to call it a queer film?
I suppose it's, it feels like it is that to me, but in a deeply subtle way. The
comments that they get at school are actually quite lightly done. And they're
made by girls, which is interesting, it stays away from the cliches of the tough
guys at school, for most of it, ribbing them. I think that, for me, the big
change that occurs sort of almost underlines just how beautiful the material was
there to work with. And that's why I felt that sort of disappointment, that
deepest, I've seen other films, Hanukkah films, Catherine Breyer films where
something really awful happens on a very subtle scene that was made with such
lightness of touch. And you just feel such a strange sensation inside. And it
makes you ask, you know, what is the problem there? What do you want from this
film? And why? Why did you want this to go right? Why did you want to see this
play out in a cozy way? Yeah, that's absolutely right. You do want their
friendship to kind of last forever, really, and you want it to last forever
within the film. And he rips it apart on purpose, I think, in order to kind of
put us through that. But I do feel both times I've seen it, I do feel a certain
deflation towards the end, the focus becomes more about the parents. And those
performances are very good. But I just feel as though the relationships there,
there's a certain kind of closure we have to reach that is necessary rather than
particularly insightful to me. Well, we've talked about the leads who absolutely
steal the film. But what about the supporting cast? How do they do? The two
actresses who play the mothers, I think, are excellent. But both quite well
known Belgian actresses, Lea Druker and Emily Dequenne, who was in the Dardenne
brothers Rosetta, which was a Palm Door winner in the late 90s, who plays Remy's
mother, who has a lot of unanswered questions that she sort of, she kind of
lingers on the periphery of the film wanting answers, really, about what's going
on. And I think they're both really good. I would not fault their performances
at all. I just feel as though you just miss the boys together. Yeah. Well, Kate,
it comes in the wake of After Sun, also Oscar touted, the film about an 11 year
old girl on holiday with her father, played by Paul Meskell. There is something
about children in film, particularly that age, a certain vulnerability that's
just piercing, isn't it? Yeah. And the great, the way that they film them so
close up, he's, you know, particularly Aidan Dombrin's got these giant, strange
wide eyes. He's sort of angelic looking, isn't he? Yeah, and so thin and lanky.
And it's just fascinating to look at. And you just, I don't know, it just feels,
it almost feels like children don't have to act, you know, to get these kind of
performances. And there's always this miraculous thing when you see a young
child who's picked out of obscurity, from what I understand, On a train, I think
it's a direct metamorphosis. And what they do with children to get those kind of
performances is fascinating. And it's endlessly compelling. I do think that the
best and the most remarkable scenes in the film all involve male tears. So both
the boys have moments where they are crying. And in one instance, one of them
has broken his wrist and just bursts out crying from nowhere, because his
friend's not there, really. That's what's going on behind that scene. But then
there's one remarkable scene involving one of the dads around a dinner table.
And I think it's a great scene because that character is very underexplored
otherwise. But he's shocked, because a kid asks him, how are you doing? Et toi?
kind of thing. And he's kind of taken aback, because he just doesn't expect the
question from a child. And he bursts into tears. And that gets me more than any
other scene, I think, because that's one of the underlying themes here as well,
is masculine emotion and the idea that it's not allowed to be expressed. Is
there something to say here, Tim, about what's happening in Belgian film more
widely, the Dardenne brothers, the legacy of Chantal Ackermann, does Don't
belong to a Belgian, what is a Belgian tradition? He acknowledges that Chantal
Ackermann's great film, which is now, of course, hailed as the greatest film of
all time, Jeanne Dielman, it was a huge influence on him growing up as a
filmmaker, he sort of didn't realise you could make a film that was sort of
about, in a way, nothing or about about tiny details in people's lives, and
actually turn that into a story that would sustain a whole feature. I think that
was extremely influential on him and on many people. And the film really haunted
me the day after and our producer, she said she had terrible dreams because of
it. Is it a mark of a good film, Kate, to be able to inflict such pain? I think
it probably is, you know, I think it's like, like I was saying, it's a sign of
the potential that you wanted it to go a particular way, because you were so
engaged so quickly. And it didn't want to go as you expected. And you're kind of
angry. And you know, it stirs up a hell of a lot of emotions. I woke up this
morning thinking about it for the third day running. And, you know, presumably
that will happen tomorrow as well. So yeah, I don't think I could watch it
again. Yeah. Well, you've watched it twice now. That's that's probably my limit.
That's the limit. Yeah, I think so too. You need a lot of tissues for this. It
is beautiful, but anguishing too, I think. Close, directed by Lucas Dont is in
cinemas from tomorrow. And get ready for some tears. We've just got time for
your cultural picks now. Are there things that you've been watching, reading,
listening to that you might like to share with our listeners? Kate, what have
you got for us? So I saw a showcase the other day, a young musician called Ellie
Dixon, who's actually already very famous online. One of these things where
she's finally got been got by a major label. Is she a Daisy Jones? No, she's a
bedroom producer, DJ. But also somehow that description makes me kind of sink
inside sometimes. This woman is extremely funny and extremely smart. And she's
just made a viral hit with a football anthem that she just put out online for
Celtic. Yeah, she I don't know how she does it, but she there's shades of early
talking heads and tune yards. And this is a woman who can do everything with a
laptop. And she I saw her live and it's like watching a kind of a load of
bouncing rubber balls just amazing stages. Great fun. I think we've got a clip
actually. Eyes are staring through the wall. I've run out of material. I should
have got the grocery store for lunch. I'm eating cereal. It's always pick the
phone up quick. Working hard is how it is. Well, excuse me, I got bigger fish.
Got a business meeting with my fridge. I really like that cake, but I'm not sure
I can listen to a football song for Celtic. It's not quite my thing. I think
Tim, what have you got for us? Well, we're talking about music by a pix. Yeah.
And I'm kind of pulling clear of the slightly disastrous David Bowie one that
came along a couple of years ago, which couldn't have any of his songs in it by
reading a biography of him instead, which is one of the I think maybe the best
biography of him by Paul Trinker. It's called Starman. And I'm delving into
those early years of Bowie where he was really struggling is like having just
seen Daisy and all of their band struggles to kind of, you know, switch, you
know, agents and make the albums work. Bowie went through so many different
iterations and so many band configurations and so many breakups and so many
issues in those first kind of 10 years of his career. And I'm really enjoying
digging back into that. Yeah. Are you excited about the V&A East's new
collection of 80,000 items for you? Are you a fat Bowie fan? I am. Absolutely.
2025. I think we have to wait to see. Yeah. Yeah. It's album work, set design,
sheet music, everything. And Moonage Daydream last year was again a great
corrective to everything. I love that film. Yeah. Edmund, I was going to ask
your cultural pick, but I'm wondering if you listen to music when you're
working. All the time. What do you listen to? Well, pretty much everything. I
mean, the moment listening obsessively to Wyn Kinkoor, Olufsen, the great
pianist who's got a new album. A great friend of Ron Roe. Absolutely. Yes. The
Bach and Bartok one. And Max Richter's Wolfworks, which is now back on at the
Royal Opera House. Listening again and enjoying that all over again. And just
quickly, you've got a poetry recommendation for us. Yes. Zafar Kurnil, England's
Green. I mean, what a great poet. You know, we have another fabulous new poet on
the horizon, and this is just absolutely fabulous. I totally agree with you.
I've loved that book too. Thank you so much, Kate Mossman, Tim Robey and Edmund
Duval. And that's it from us. Tomorrow, Keris and Geoffrey Abuck with Add to
Playlist, featuring the singer-songwriter Natalie Duncan and musician Brian Eno.
Next week's highlights on Front Row include a 40th anniversary production of
Carol Churchill's Top Girls in Liverpool, a review of Margaret Atwood's new
short stories, and we report on how accessible venues are, not only for
audiences, but for performers too. Join Samira on Monday at 7.15. But we leave
you with the sad news of two deaths in the world of music. Steve Mackey, the
bassist in Pulp, has died, aged only 56, and Wayne Shorter, the brilliant multi-
Grammy award-winning jazz saxophonist and innovator, aged 89. This is from his
acclaimed album Speak No Evil. Front Row was presented by Shahida Bari and the
producer was Sarah Johnson, with studio engineer Sue Mayo. The briefing room
sheds light on the Brexit-Windsor framework after the news. Welcome to the
Spark. I feel like the monkeys are juggling chainsaws. We are making changes to
the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party services and platforms,
and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023.
If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message,
please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this
service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. Small acts of interrupting those
thoughts could be life-saving. The Spark.