TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 From us, remember, tomorrow, Lisa Dusette will be presenting this programme
from Kiev, and the Archbishop of Canterbury will be doing a special thought for
the day, as he did a year ago tomorrow, on the morning of the invasion of
Ukraine. Good morning. BBC News at nine o'clock. The Labour leader, Sir Keir
Starmer, is launching what he calls five national missions, outlining his plans
for the UK if Labour wins the next general election. The commitments will be
announced during a speech in Manchester this morning. The missions include
pledges to improve the UK's economic growth, make the country a clean energy
superpower, and reduce health inequalities. On the Today programme, Sir Keir
denied that the plans lacked detail. The missions are not vague, they are very
clear, they're ambitious. What sits underneath these missions are the specifics.
What, then, are you going to do to get this to happen? And so we have the
specific, I don't know, the columns, if you like, that hold the missions up, and
then what I'm going to set out this morning in my speech is then, what are the
first steps along the journey? Police say the dissident Republican group, the
New IRA, is the main focus of detectives investigating the shooting of an off-
duty police officer at a sports complex in Omer in County Tyrone last night.
Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is in a critical but stable condition in
hospital. The government has confirmed plans to establish the first independent
regulator of men's football in England, the body, which was recommended in a fan
review last year, will aim to make clubs financially resilient, give fans
greater input, and have the power to stop clubs joining breakaway leagues. The
cases of 12,000 asylum seekers are to be fast-tracked by the home office to try
to fulfil Rishi Sunak's pledge to reduce the backlog of applications by the end
of the year. Migrants from Afghanistan, Eritrea, Libya, Syria and Yemen will
have their claims decided on the basis of a questionnaire rather than in person.
A collection of more than 80,000 items linked to David Bowie have been acquired
by the Victoria and Albert Museum to be put on public display. Members of the
public will be able to see the singers' lyrics, sheet music and costumes at the
newly created David Bowie Centre in East London in two years' time. BBC News.
This is BBC Radio 4, where, later this morning, we have a special edition of
From Our Own Correspondent as we approach a year of the war in Ukraine. We'll
hear personal reflections from the conflict zone and around the world. Oleg
Heron reports on the everyday danger in the Donbass. In Moscow, Steve Rosenberg
will tell us about the propaganda fed to Russian citizens, and our US editor,
Sarah Smith, lets us in on some of the secrecy behind President Biden's surprise
visit to Kiev. That's all in From Our Own Correspondent at 11 o'clock. And if
you're in the mood for some music this morning, why not try the classical
mixtape on BBC Sounds? But now on Radio 4, it's in our time with Melvin Brack.
Hello. Paul Erdos, 1913 to 1996, is one of the most celebrated mathematicians of
the 20th century. During his long career, he made a number of impressive
advances in our understanding of maths and developed whole new fields in the
subject. Born into a Jewish family in Hungary just before the outbreak of World
War I, his life was shaped by the rise of fascism in Europe, anti-Semitism and
the Cold War. His reputation for mathematical problem solving is unrivaled and
is extraordinary prolific. He produced more than 1,500 papers and collaborated
with around 500 other academics. He also had an unconventional lifestyle.
Instead of having a long-term post at one university, he spent much of his life
travelling around, visiting other mathematicians, often staying for just a few
days. With me to discuss the career of Paul Erdos are Timothy Goers, Professor
of Mathematics at the College of France in Paris and fellow Trinity College,
Cambridge, Andrit Legane, Associate Professor in Mathematics at the University
of Birmingham and Colver Olyodougall, Professor of Pure Mathematics at the
University of St Andrews. Colver, would you start by telling us something about
his early childhood? Sure. He was born to a middle-class family in Budapest in
March of 1913. Both of his parents were high school teachers. They both taught
maths and physics, his mother and his father. And on some level, he should have
been set for a pretty comfortable existence. There were two particularly notable
aspects of his early childhood though. So the first was that when she went in to
hospital to give birth to him, his mother already had two girls, he had two
older sisters, and a wave of scarlet fever went through Budapest while she was
in hospital. And as he was being born, both of what would have been his elder
sisters died. So this was a deeply traumatic event for the whole family, as you
can imagine, and meant that his parents were very, very protective of him for
all of his childhood after that. By his own admission, he didn't butter his own
bread until he first arrived at Trinity College at the age of 21. And then the
second really significant event that happened early in his life was World War I,
when he broke out and his father went off to fight in the war and was captured
by the Soviets almost immediately and didn't return for seven years. So he was
in a very, very intense relationship just with his mother from an early age.
Then we had an extreme right-wing government who came to power in Hungary. And
then what happened to him? So his mother had briefly been promoted to head
mistress by the communist government just before the extremely right-wing one.
And as a consequence of that, she lost her job as a teacher when they came into
power. She still managed to make a living. She was tutoring him. But that meant
she was having to work quite hard going to different tutoring classes and he was
left mostly in the care of a governess while she was out working. He said he
taught himself to count at the age of three by trying to count down the days
until he could see his mother for the day times again. And then as he went
through his childhood, various anti-Semitic laws were passed, of which probably
the most pertinent to him was one called Numerus Clausus, which restricted the
number of Jewish students at universities to six percent, which was roughly the
proportion of the population that was Jewish at the time, but was much, much
less than what had been the proportion of Jews going to university. So it was
clear from a very early age that it was going to be hard for him to have an
academic career in Hungary. There are these stories of his prodigious
intelligence at the age of three, at the age of five. I mean, somebody would
say, give me a number. And mine would say 45678 and he would cube it. How would
you make of that? Is that taught or is that inherited? This idea is the clearest
idea I've come across of some genius just popping up. Or did it just pop up? How
does that happen? I think it must have just popped up in him. That kind of
facility with early calculation seems to be randomly distributed around people.
It's rare. It doesn't necessarily correlate with being good at maths later on.
But in his case, it most squarely did. He said that because he was left alone by
his parents so much, he just became obsessed with Numerus as a way of passing
the time. Andrew, how did you begin to show... Well, we've edged into that. But
how did he begin to show his mathematical talent so that others besides his
mother saw it? When his mum's friends came round, he would ask them, how old are
you? And he would then tell them how many seconds they'd lived for. But then
really, I guess the big breakthrough was when he was a teenager. So in Hungary,
they have this lovely culture of journals. So journals for high school children.
And in them, you'll have mathematical problems stated each month. Then students
would write in and give what they thought was the solution. And then in the next
month, the winners, the people that were correct, they would be announced. So at
that stage, Erdos was one of the most prolific problem solvers in these high
school journals, along with some other actually very good mathematicians. It
turned out people like Paul Turan as well. So he sort of made a name for himself
as a problem solver, even in his teenage years. He took a first class degree and
his PhD at the same time, when he was about 17. Yeah, so he went to university,
the University of Budapest, aged 17. As you said, he was doing them both
simultaneously. And even at an early stage, he was doing novel research. So he
was often meeting other young mathematicians, people like Paul Turan, George
Saccares. They were meeting in parks or they're going for walks. And they were
talking about mathematics, bouncing off each other, getting ideas from each
other. It was also a very significant point in his life, not just in the sort of
circle around Budapest, but also he made a name for himself in the number theory
community. So he... Already when he was 17. So he re... well, just a couple of
years after that, but still during his undergraduate. So he reproved something
called Chebychev's theorem. And Chebychev's theorem was around since the 19th
century. But he gave a very elegant and simple and clever proof of this. Thank
you very much, Tim. Can we have a little more detail about this theorem,
Chebychev's theorem, and the difference between the old proof and the new proof
that Dosh came up with? Chebychev's theorem concerns prime numbers. And those
are numbers like 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, which don't have any factors apart from the
obvious ones, 1 and themselves. So, for example, 9 is not a prime number because
it's 3 times 3, but 11, you can only write it as 1 times 11, and so that is a
prime number. If you start asking yourself questions like, can you write a
formula for the nth largest prime number? It seems to be remarkably difficult.
In fact, it's generally believed now that there is no usable, sensible formula
for the nth largest prime number. And being? And just being some number, so...
An arbitrary number. So a formula that would tell you for any given integer,
like a million or a billion, what the millionth largest number is or the
billionth largest number. It's not believed that such a formula exists. So,
instead, what we try to do is look a little bit... We'll stand back a little bit
and just ask ourselves questions like, roughly, how many primes are there
between 1 and any given number that you specify? Can you have a formula that
just at least approximates the number of primes? And Chebychev, what he did was
solve a problem known as Bertrand's Postulate, which had been posed five years
earlier, which says that between any number and twice that number, there must be
a prime. Euclid had already proved millennia earlier that there are infinitely
many primes. So this is a much more precise result. It says between any number
and twice that number, there must be a prime, which in particular implies that
there must be infinitely many primes. But Chebychev's method was in some ways
quite advanced. You need quite a lot of mathematical expertise to read it. Erdos
came up with a new proof of Chebychev's theorem, which I've read somewhere. It's
described as something that if you've got a maths A level, you can understand
this proof. There's a word that mathematicians use, which is the word
elementary. And elementary doesn't mean easy, but it means it's built out of
easy ingredients. So if you've got the ingredients, if you've got the knowledge
of an A level student and a bit of patience and willingness to try to understand
this proof, then you can. Whereas if you try to understand Chebychev's proof,
you have to have learnt quite a lot more mathematics. Actually, you get a little
bit more out of Chebychev's argument. You don't just get that there's a prime
between n and 2n, but you also get a reasonable estimate for how many primes
there are up to any given number. When I say reasonable, what I mean is you can
say that it's at least this number and at most twice that number, something like
that. So it narrows it down to within a factor of 2, as we would say. Do you
mathematicians do this for the joy of it, like people sing? Or do you because it
has some end use? I would say both. So we do it for the joy of it, but we're
very fortunate in that quite a lot of what we do does eventually turn out to
have an end use. And so for that reason, people are prepared to, so to speak,
subsidise our hobby. Can you give us an end use? This is almost a cliched
example. Not a cliche, welcome. But number theory of which this is an example
and factorisation and prime numbers and things are absolutely essential to the
method of cryptography that we use in order to be able to do transactions,
financial transactions safely online. So that's a very big application of
mathematics. But there are many, many others. Thank you. I call that. So he's
been to university, he's a star turn, he's going to do mathematics for the rest
of his life. And then he came across to Manchester University for four or five
years. What was that all about? So he'd been invited by a number theorist called
Maudel to go and work with the group in Manchester. His fame had become quite
great by this point. Isaiah Schur, who's a wonderful number theorist, had
christened him the wizard for Budapest for his skill. So it hadn't been so hard
for him to find a job. Since he was young, his parents had known that he would
have to leave Hungary. So the state of attacks on the Jewish population there
was such that it was clear he could never be an academic in Hungary. His mother
had suggested that maybe they should convert when he was seven. And he had
turned to her and said, you may do what you like, but I shall stay as I was
born, which is a statement from a seven year old who is quite remarkable. So
they had made sure that he could speak English and French and German as well as
Hungarian. And he packed his bags and went off via Vienna and briefly stopping
in Trinity College, Cambridge, and on to Manchester. Who did you work with in
Manchester that was important to him and to them? So Mordell was his boss in
Manchester. He did a lot of work with Hardy and Littlewood in Cambridge when he
was there. And he also started working on what became known later as the Erdos
Corado Theorem, but for strange reasons wasn't published until the 1960s. So he
started really cooking up this blend of number theory and combinatorics that was
to stay with him for the rest of his life while he was in Manchester. But it
wasn't that he only collaborated with people in Manchester. He started working
with everybody he could. Was this unusual? Yes, I would say so. So most... The
collaboration I mean. Yes, absolutely. So most people at the time mostly worked
on their own, whereas Erdos from a very early age possibly started by the walks
that Andrew's already mentioned around Budapest with his friends as an
undergraduate, loved to do maths with other people. He did do maths on his own,
but he strongly preferred to work with others. And he would go to Cambridge
often for the weekend. He was travelling all around Britain working with people.
And at the end of three years, it was becoming increasingly clear that Hitler
was getting more and more dangerous and that he decided he needed to leave
Europe for good. So after a final visit back to Budapest in the summer of 1938,
he charged back to London, got on the Queen Mary and set sail for the Institute
for Advanced Studies in Princeton. And did he get anything else out of the
Manchester experience? That was when he first started getting interested in lots
of questions about what the numbers look like on average. So Tim's already given
us the definition of a prime number, which is a number that's only divisible by
one in itself. He got interested in the question of how many different prime
numbers divide a given number. So say, for example, 12 is only divisible by two
and three. Eight is only divisible by two. That's the only prime that divides
into eight. So that's got a score of one. Whereas if I go for 30, because that's
two times three times five, that's got a score of three. And so he got very
interested in the question of not just is a number prime and can I count the
primes, but can I count how many divisors there are of a given number? And he
proved his first results in that direction while he was in Manchester. And it
was because of that, and similar results that he was eventually able to get the
fellowship at the Institute for Advanced Studies, which I should mention the
pull factor as well as the push factors. It was described as an intellectual
paradise, the Institute for Advanced Studies in America. Yes, in America. So it
was only five years old. Einstein was its first professor. There were zero
students, no teaching responsibilities. One could just go there and do
mathematics and theoretical physics to one's heart's content. And John von
Neumann, who's famous for many things, including work on the nuclear bomb and
game theory and economics, managed to get a fellowship for Erich to go and work.
And I'd financed him, did it? That financed him for the first year. At the end
of that first year, for reasons that are unclear, he applied for a renewal and
wasn't granted it. And Einstein argued strongly for him to get a further job and
said he had used strong words the like of which he had not used before to try
and enable Erich to stay. But somehow he was deemed not the right fit. And there
were so many Jewish mathematicians coming over. There were many clues to why it
wasn't the right fit. I mean, he seems to do mathematics all the time with
mathematicians. And so what was he doing that upset people? I think he was maybe
a bit wild in some of his behaviour. I mean, I never met him. I'm just a bit too
young to have done so. There's a quote saying that Princeton didn't want to keep
him because he was uncouth and unconventional. So he was definitely
unconventional in a sense that he would speak his mind freely. There's stories
about when he's talking with people. I mean, this is a few days later, but
talking with people to do with the Manhattan Project in a restaurant, he loudly
says, Oh, how's the A-bomb going? So he's very uncouth in that sense. It's a big
thing for a man that intelligent, backed by a person like Einstein to be kicked
out, isn't it? Or am I? Yeah, of course he is. Yeah. So is there any more
reasons? I did meet him myself, actually, but he was pretty old and I was quite
young. By that time, I think he had sort of morphed into a sort of eccentric old
man, not somebody that one would rub anybody up the wrong way. It is worth
mentioning that, I mean, this is now 1939 and the number of Jewish scientists
and mathematicians are attempting to get out of Europe and into America is very,
very high. And that's part of the reason why there's such competition for posts.
Can you tell us, give us some idea then when he gets to America, what does he
start to work on? I think he's working on a range of things at that stage. So
he's interested in something called discrete mathematics. What's that? So
discrete mathematics is the study of discrete mathematical objects. What's a
discrete mathematical object? It's an object that in some sense is non-
continuous or countable in some sense. So if you look at the whole numbers, set
of whole numbers, one, two, three, four, and so on, that is countable. You can
list the numbers as an ordering of those numbers. He's also non-continuous in a
sense that the gap between one and two, there's a gap there. It's not a
continuous thing. So there's a gap between one and two, two and three and so on.
So he starts getting interested in discrete mathematics. And this is a topic
which is perhaps a bit unfashionable at the time. He starts getting interested
in things called graph theory. So the study of networks, he's interested in
Ramsey theory, which is the study of complete disorder is impossible. So he was
so driven by mathematics and curious about different aspects of mathematics that
he was willing to go out there and work on problems that maybe weren't as
fashionable to other mathematicians. But America suited him and yet he had to
leave it. So I guess you're now talking about the 1950s. Yeah. So it's kind of a
bit unfortunate. So he had a temporary position at the University of Notre Dame,
as the Americans call it. He actually was offered a permanent position there,
but he turned it down. You know, he he suited the nomadic lifestyle. At some
stage, he wanted to go to Amsterdam to a conference and they refused him entry
back into the US again. Partly it's just because of the time it was, it was the
McCarthy over the 1950s where America was just suspicious of foreigners,
particularly from communist countries. Also there was an FBI file on him. He was
walking in Long Island with some other mathematicians and they didn't see the no
trespassing sign and they just we were talking about maths wandered through to
this military transmitter and then they were sort of nabbed by the FBI and it
was all cleared up. But you know, it created an FBI file on him and I think it
was just an excuse to get rid of him. So graph theory has been mentioned, Tim,
can you take it in that direction? Certainly. The first thing to say is that
there's an unfortunate terminological clash, which is that the word graph, as
used by most people, means something you plot that shows how one thing depends
on another, it might be covid cases as a function of time or something like
that. But we're talking here about when you talk about graph theory, it's a
completely different meaning and a better word, but unfortunately not the word
that most people use. The word that Andrew just mentioned is the word network.
So you can think of a graph as a bunch of points, which if you're using the
language of networks, you might call nodes. And some of the points are joined
together by lines which are known as edges. And that's all there is to a graph.
A bunch of points, some joined by edges. So you might ask, why is that
important? And the reason is that it can be or one reason is that graphs can be
used to model a huge number of phenomena because the points, which we call
vertices, can represent objects of a certain kind and the lines joining them,
the edges, can represent potential relationships between them. So to give a few
examples, points could represent websites and you could join two points by an
edge if there's a link between those two websites. And then you get a graph that
is somehow modeling, in a certain sense, the structure of the internet. Or
points could represent people and you could join two points by an edge if those
two people are friends with each other and you get a sort of social network
modeled by a graph there. And then you also have graphs in pure mathematics. For
example, if you just take a shape like a cube and you look at it, it's got some
points. It's got the vertices of the cube and some of those vertices are joined
by edges. So the cube is a graph or can be thought of as a graph with eight
vertices and 12 edges. So graphs have both an importance for modeling real life
phenomena, which it often turns out that you can get a lot of insight into the
real world phenomena by forgetting all the details except this underlying graph.
And also they model various purely mathematical phenomena. You had problem
solver, wasn't he basically? Erdos was, yes. That was what he's maybe mostly
remembered for, as it's just a supreme, not just problem solver but also problem
poser. He asked a lot of questions and the ones that he particularly liked, he
would offer monetary rewards for, which varied from something like, you know,
$30 all the way up to several thousand dollars, depending on how important or
difficult he thought the problem was. He gave money to so many good causes. He
gave away all the money he got, basically. And he didn't have much of that. He
won the Wolf Prize and then just gave it basically, he kept a little bit as he
needed to get from sort of to his next person who was spending the night with
and gave all the rest away. Yeah, it was $50,000 and he said he kept $720.
Culver, one of the fields of math that he developed, essentially, was Ramsey
theory. So away you go. So, Ramsey theory starts with a particular problem,
which I'm very fond of, called the party problem. And I'll give the first
interesting instance of it as an example. Now, it says, how many guests do you
need to have at a party to guarantee that either at least three of them all know
each other or at least three of them all don't know each other? So how big a
party do I have to have if I definitely want three friends that can stand in the
corner and catch up on gossip or to find three people who've not met before who
can who can be introduced to each other? So I'm going to show you how to see
that six people is enough. So imagine that I'm hosting a party and I've invited
five friends. But maybe they're not my friends. We're interested in maybe them
knowing each other or not knowing each other. So these five people, they might
know me or not know me. So there's two possibilities and there's five of them.
So at least three of them must fall into one of the cases. It's not possible for
two of them to not know me and two of them to know me. The fifth person has to
go somewhere. So let's assume that three of them know me. I'll talk about the
other case afterwards and think about those three people. So maybe the three of
you, I guess at my party and you all know me, then maybe two of you know each
other and then the two of you plus me make three people that all know each
other. And if that's not the case, then no two of you know each other. And so
the three of you form three people that don't know each other. And so we managed
to do that with six people. If I'd said that at least three people didn't know
me, we would have swapped everything round. That's the first question of Ramsey
theory. And that shows that six people is enough if I want three to know each
other or not. So I can replace that three by any other number. I can say I want
a party that's big enough for 17 people to all know each other or 17 to not. And
Frank Ramsey had proved that there always is a big enough party. No matter how
many people there's always a big enough party. Now Erdish came along and firstly
found a much nicer, simpler, better way of proving that there's always a big
enough party and his band on how many people you need at the party was smaller
than the previously known band. He also was able to show a lower band on how
many people. So a party size, which is definitely not big enough using some,
some beautiful arguments and essentially took what had been this single loan
result and turned it into an entire theory of mathematics, which, which people
spend their whole careers working on nowadays. Andrew, you want to come in?
Yeah. So one thing I wanted to say as well is that Ramsey theory isn't just
about graphs and about these parties, but actually this phenomenon occurs
elsewhere in mathematics. So Tim talked about one of Erdish's, about his open
problem. So one of his most famous open problems is the happy ending problem.
And this is a problem in Ramsey theory. Here you, rather than looking at a
party, you've got a collection of points that you draw on a piece of paper. So
imagine you draw three, three points on a piece of paper and then as long as
they're not in a straight line, well, those three points will be the corners of
a triangle. Now what about if I give you four points? Well those four points may
not form a four-sided shape because you can draw a triangle and then you can
plop another point in the middle. And that's not a four-sided shape. It's not
the corners of a four-sided shape, what we call a convex quadrilateral. Actually
you can ask this question more generally, how many points do you need to put on
a piece of paper such that some of those points form your favorite, I don't
know, Pentagon, your six-sided shape, seven-sided shape, and so on. What Erdish
and George Sekare showed is actually these, there's always a solution to this
problem. In a similar way to the party problem, there is a solution. If you put
enough points on a piece of paper, you're going to get your end-sided shape
somewhere in that picture. So this was worked on 80 years ago by Erdish and
Sekare. They actually just asked the question of what's the right answer, how
small, how many points do you need to put on a piece of paper such that as long
as no three of them are in a line, then somewhere in that end points will form
the corners of an end-sided shape. And we don't know the answer even though we
don't know the exact answer. We know there is some answer, but we don't know
exactly what it is. Do you think you ever will? Oh, that's a tough one because
actually that's a very few problems in Ramsey theory. Do we think that we're
going to get a salute exact solution to? This is one where we actually have a
reasonably good, it's what we call an asymptotic solution. So as n is large, if
we're looking at a n-sided shape where n is large, we have a reasonably good
answer to it. But I think probably the answer is probably not exactly. Can we go
to continue this, Tim, with you? We come up with the phrase, the probabilistic
method. What's that about and what's its significance? Well, I think the easiest
way to illustrate that is to go back to what Calder was saying about the party
problem and the question you can ask, how many people do you need in order to
guarantee that some fixed number, be it 17 or 100 or whatever, either all know
each other or all don't know each other. If you want to show that you need a lot
of people, then you've got to come up with some sort of configuration of or some
sort of knowledge network, so to speak, or equivalently some graph that
demonstrates that you really do need a lot of people. And the difficulty with
the problem is that if you sit down and try to design this person knows that
person, or this person doesn't know that person and so on, it's incredibly
difficult to write down a specification that demonstrates that you really do
need anything like as many people as the proof requires. And it genuinely is
very, very difficult to design this. I just had a brilliant idea, which was, if
it's difficult to design it, don't design it. What you do instead, well, it's
called the probabilistic method. What you do instead is you just choose your
network entirely at random. So for each pair of people, you toss a coin, if it's
heads, they know each other. If it's tails, they don't know each other. And it
turns out that if you do that, then you can show that it's extremely likely that
you're going to need an absolutely huge number of people before you get your
specified number that either all know each other or all don't know each other.
This is very counterintuitive, because you might think that if almost everything
works, then surely you can just sit down and write down something that will
work. But unfortunately, the set of things that you can actually describe is a
very small set. And so you can't sort of rule out that all the ones you can
describe happen to be the unfortunate ones that don't work. So you know that
almost everything works. And this phenomenon actually occurs. So what makes it
particularly important is that it occurred in this one example. But once you've
seen this example, it just changes the way you think as a mathematician. And
then you start seeing this phenomenon all over the place. There are many, many
situations where it's very hard to describe a mathematical object that
explicitly that has certain properties, but much easier just to show that almost
every object has those properties. It's a very strange phenomenon, but it's a
very important one. And where does that lead you? For Erdos, it led to a lot of
other solutions to problems in graph theory and other areas where they had
seemed extremely hard. But once you have this idea that perhaps you could just
try choosing a random object and seeing if that almost always works, they become
suddenly much easier. Picking up the word random, Kalva, random graph theory,
Erdos was into that. What did you find there? What did you do with it? So in a
series of eight papers with Alfred Rennie, who's another Hungarian
mathematician, Erdos and Rennie invented the field of random graph theory from
scratch and proved that it was important. So the model that they were imagining,
they had two different ones, but I'll talk about one in particular, is that you
pick some number of vertices and you pick a probability. So maybe your
probability is a half. And you look at all the possible pairs of vertices and
you put in each edge randomly with probability a half and you ask yourself, what
can I say about the resulting graph? Is it possible, for example, for me to walk
along the edges from one vertex to any other or is it going to break into
different bits? Am I going to be able to colour the vertices with some number of
colours such that no two vertices sharing an edge are the same colour? And this
model of random graphs, they proved amazingly precise properties about it, which
I think Tim will tell us more about in a minute. But it's turned out to be
incredibly important for lots and lots of real world applications. So for
example, during the Covid pandemic, one of the models that was used when trying
to analyse if household bubbling could change over Christmas, if one remembers
that dark Christmas, was modelling our interactions with each other as a random
graph. We're all in households of between one and about four people. And then
somewhat randomly, we know people in other households. And so if somebody in one
household gets infected, probably everybody in that household gets infected, but
if they randomly meet with other people, the infection might or might not spread
along the edges in our graph of knowing and not knowing. And that really does
help to feed into questions about whether or not we could meet each other. Do
you want to develop that, Tim? Well, just to say that I suppose it gives another
very good example of an application of graph theory. It's another network. So
the vertices there would be people and the edges would be something like you've
joined two people by an edge if they come into close proximity. And sometimes
you can do something a little bit more. You can attach a weight to an edge. So
you could say that maybe if two people meet all the time because they live in
the same house, you have to attach a high weight, which means it's more likely
that the disease will transmit. Whereas if they just happen to meet each other
in a shop while they're buying bread or something, then there'd be an edge but
with much lower weight. So this weighted graph is fundamental to the whole area
of epidemiology. You get a lot of insight into how a disease spreads just from
the graph theory. Andrew, he liked to question himself, didn't he? Pose a
problem for himself to solve as well as finding problems that had not been fully
solved at his satisfaction. Yeah. So his mantra was to prove and conjecture. So
by conjecture, we mean pose open problems. And it wasn't just for himself that
he would pose problems. What he saw was that it was a duty of a mathematician to
sort of lay the marker points for other mathematicians to follow and say, this
is an interesting question. And as Tim mentioned earlier, he would often assign
money to these problems just to act as a guide. The more the problem was worth,
the more interested he was in the problem being solved. So actually many of his
problems have been solved since he died. One example of this is, so we mentioned
prime numbers earlier. So one special case of one of his conjectures is that in
prime numbers, in a set of prime numbers, we know there's infinitely many, but
inside them, there are arithmetic progressions of arbitrary length. So what do I
mean by that? I mean, if you take an arithmetic regression is you start with
some number, and then you have a series of numbers whose differences are the
same, something like 2, 5, 8, 11, 14, they all differ by three there. So that
was, for example, a special case of one of Eddish's problems that was solved
about 18, 19 years ago by Green and Tau. So if you've got a set of prime
numbers, then there's always going to be an arbitrary long arithmetic
progression. So you can go on forever finding this arithmetic progression. And
that's quite counterintuitive, actually, because, as was mentioned earlier,
primes are kind of sparse, there's infinite many, but they get less and less
frequent, or the density of them inside the whole numbers is less and less
frequent. And so to have this regular structure, Eddish was just great at posing
problems. And I think sometimes he was willing just to take a punt, and he would
pose a question that was just interesting to him. And sometimes they would pay
off, and they would leave to lead to fruitful research directions. And sometimes
they weren't necessarily paying off. But the point was, he was so willing to go
out there and and pose problems that it's led to new directions emerging in
mathematics. Here's another phrase I only encountered the other day, Tim, that's
a threshold, the threshold phenomenon. That's a fascinating phenomenon that he
observed in his work with Alfred Renyi. Colter mentioned the property graph,
it's called a graph connected, if you can get from any vertex in the graph to
any other vertex by going along a path down some of its edges. They showed that
if you start with no edges at all, and then you just randomly put in an edge and
randomly put in another edge and randomly put in another edge, you just keep on
going like that. And for a long time, the chances that the graph is connected,
it's almost certain that it won't be connected. Then you get to a certain point,
the threshold and just beyond the threshold, it suddenly jumps from almost
certainly not being connected to almost certainly being connected. The point at
which you go from almost certainly not being connected to almost certainly being
connected just jumps extremely fast. And this is called a threshold phenomenon.
You know why that happens? Well, I do, but it's a sort of complicated
mathematical proof. But I think the main thing to say is that this phenomenon
turns out to be extremely widespread. And it's also occurs in physics and
statistical physics, it would be known as a phase transition. The graph sort of
just suddenly goes from having one phase where it's not connected to another
phase where it is connected. There are many, also many open problems concerning
phase transitions. When you get a little bit more complicated than the
properties that Erdos and Renyi studied for graphs, you can get problems that
are very interesting and important. Important for what? For example, there's a
phenomenon called the self avoiding walk. That's a random walk in amongst points
that never visits itself twice. And that can model something like a long piece
of DNA that can't occupy the same point more than once. Understanding various
structures that occur in chemistry and things like that. So understanding phase
transitions is very important. It's an interesting area where physicists would
say that they understand a lot more than mathematicians do because
mathematicians are looking for completely rigorous proofs of these phenomena.
Whereas physicists are sort of satisfied with slightly more heuristic arguments,
let's say. Do we need to say more about randomness in relation to number theory?
Absolutely. So one of the many fields which Erdos founded and the one that he
described himself as being proudest of is known as probabilistic number theory.
Now number theory is about properties of the whole numbers and the bit of it he
was most interested in is this question of divisibility by primes that's come up
a few times before now. And it doesn't seem like randomness should have anything
to do with it. I mean, the fact that 12 is two times two times three is not
random. That's set in stone. But together with a Polish mathematician Mark Kacz,
they worked out that if rather than looking at individual numbers and asking how
many different primes divide a number, they started looking at large sets of
numbers, say all the numbers up to a million or all the numbers up to a million
million and asked how many primes divided all of them and looked at the count
and drew a graph of it, say not graph in the sense of vertices and edges, but
graph in the sense of like a bar chart, say the resulting chart winds up looking
just like the bell curve histogram that we see across all sorts of real world
things. So were you to toss a coin a thousand times and record the number of
heads and tails and then do it again and do it again and do it again and record
how many heads you got. On average, you'd expect to get about 500 heads, but you
wouldn't get perfectly 500 heads every time you'd get mostly 500s and 499s and
501s, slightly fewer 502 and so on. And it would come down in that that lovely
bell shaped curve that I'm sure lots of our listeners have seen in many
contexts. He discovered that we get a curve like that when we ask about the
number of prime divisors. And it's kind of incredible. I put my little laptop to
work coming down yesterday on the train and asked it to do this count for me for
all the numbers up to a million. And his formula predicts that the average
number of prime divisors should be between two and three, a bit closer to three
than two. Now you can't have two and a half prime divisors, of course. So what
my computer returned to me was that the most common answer was three. And then
shortly after that was two. And then shortly after that was four. And then
there's a few primes and powers of primes. And then five and six and seven with
the smallest numbers, there's only seven numbers, less than a million that are
divisible by seven primes. So even a million, I could see this kind of bell
curve phenomena beginning. And nobody had thought of mixing probability and
divisibility by primes like that before. And you can once you've got the idea of
doing that, you can ask all sorts of other questions too. Jim, he's seen as he's
seen as more of a problem solver than a theory developer. Do you agree with
that? I do. It's a distinction, which is more a matter of emphasis and absolute
distinction. Because if you look at the problems that he posed, once you start
thinking about them, it may just look like a whole lot of isolated problems. But
once you actually start thinking about them, you realize that there are
difficulties or quite deep difficulties associated with the problems. And that
in order to solve the problems, you're forced to come up with ideas. You
suddenly get a sense that Erdos, these problems hadn't come out of nowhere.
They'd come out of some quite deep thought. Nevertheless, it is the case that
there is a contrast between the way different mathematicians operate. And some
would say that what they're really trying to do is improve their understanding.
And if they improve their understanding, then solving problems will be a
consequence of that. And others, and Erdos is more like the other kind, would
say that what they really want to do is solve problems. By solving problems,
they will improve understanding. And there was a very nice metaphor of the
mathematician Alexander Groten-Dieck, who said that he considered the idea of a
nut. You want to open a nut. Two approaches. One is you get a nutcracker and you
squeeze as hard as you can until the nut breaks and then you've got inside.
Groten-Dieck's preferred approach was to put the nut into some sort of liquid
and just leave it there for a very, very long time until the shell softened and
is opened very easily. So Groten-Dieck regarded himself as more of a theory
builder, somebody who wants his understanding to improve until problems get
solved easily. And I think Erdos was more of the other kind where he just wanted
to go straight in and directly attack problems. Yeah, he had a lovely discussion
of the problems he posed himself and he said some of them were like marshmallows
in that they were incredibly tasty to solve but dissolve on your mouth quite
quickly afterwards and leave not much left, whereas others were like acorns in
that trying to solve them could produce the roots of a huge mathematical tree.
So I think he himself was aware of these different ways problem solving could
go. Andrew, can you tell us what's going on now? What's an Erdos number? Yeah,
so an Erdos number is a bit of mathematical fun really. We like to measure our
distance as mathematicians from Erdos. So if you are poor Erdos, you have an
Erdos number of zero. If you've written a paper with poor Erdos, you have an
Erdos number of one. If you've written a paper with someone that's written a
paper with Erdos, you have an Erdos number of two and so on and so forth. So to
put in some context, because Erdos had about 500 co-authors, there's about 500
people with an Erdos number of one. And in AD, there's more than 10,000 people
with an Erdos number of two. And it's not just mathematicians. So Albert
Einstein has an Erdos number of two, for example. So most mathematicians have an
Erdos number somewhere between one and five. And actually, it's not that
impressive to have a small Erdos number. I'd be more impressed with finding
someone with an Erdos number of 10, a mathematician, because I'd wonder how did
they get that far removed from Erdos's work. So, each of you, what's your Erdos
number and what does it mean, starting with you, Colburn? Well, I'm the PhD
supervisor, Peter Cameron, collaborated with Erdos and I have since published
with my PhD supervisor. So my Erdos number is two. Likewise, I have an Erdos
number of two. So I worked with a mathematician called Sascha Kostoshka, who
happened to work with Erdos. So that's my Erdos number as well. And mine should
be two, because my supervisor was a close collaborator of Erdos. But actually,
I've never had a joint paper with my supervisor. So for a long time, it was
four. And then a few years ago, it went down to three. I collaborated with
someone who collaborated with someone who collaborated with Erdos. It's a cross-
question to ask them. Just as much as I'm interested, how do you rate him? I
think the biggest compliment I can make as a discrete mathematician, as a
combinatorialist, is that it's very hard to work on a problem and not be
influenced by Erdos. So what I'll do when I'm approaching a problem is I'll try
and do things randomly. I'll do the probabilistic method or think, oh, is there
some Ramsey type behaviour here? So as someone working in his field, I think on
a weekly, on a monthly basis, I'm influenced by him. So in that sense, he was
incredibly important. I would say the same. I also work in very much Erdos-style
mathematics. You can't escape his influence, nor would you want to, because he
had such amazing ideas. I'd like to, yeah, echo the previous two remarks, but
also say, quite apart from his mathematical influence, I think this
collaborative style of doing mathematics really has changed maths for the good.
Most of my research is in collaboration with other people. It's made being a
mathematician a completely different thing from what it might have been before
him. And it might have tended that way anyway, but his fondness for
collaboration, his support of lots of female mathematicians who he worked with,
and his insistence on beauty in mathematics and finding joy in mathematics have
really changed it for all of us. There was a lovely limerick about him, which
I'd love to tell, which he was delighted by. So a conjecture both deep and
profound, a search that a circle is round, in a paper by Erdos written in
Kurdish, a counterexample is found. And Erdos was so pleased by this, he tried
to publish a paper in Kurdish, but unfortunately couldn't find a journal to do
so. But that sense of playfulness and joy in what we do is a wonderful thing to
have left the rest of us. Well, that was terrific. Thank you very much. And I've
had to listen to it several times, but still, thank you very much. Thanks
Colber, Bernie Dougal, Andrew Traglone and Timothy Gowers. And our studio
engineer, Jackie Marjoram, next week, Megalith, the stone monument first built
in Britain around 6,000 years ago. Thank you for listening. In Our Time with
Melvin Bragg is produced by Simon Tillerson. Continuing our celebration of the
centenary of BBC radio drama. The Huntsman now purposefully directed his
footsteps. Analyzing the most groundbreaking plays from the vast drama archive.
It's intensely physical. It's visceral. You can go to different places and tell
the stories from different points of view. Dramatic beats with me, Michael
Simmons Roberts. Everything in British storytelling on television owes so much
to radio drama. On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. On Saturday night at 8. Now on Radio
4, our Book of the Week. Today in Catherine Rundle's biography of John Dunn. A
tricky start to a relationship that fuelled some of the most desire-filled
poetry in the English language. Blake Ritson reads Super Infinite. Who was she?
Anne Moore. The very young woman with whom the complicated, furious, funny poet
was so in love. We know very little. We do not even know how she preferred to
spell her own name. As with the capriciousness typical of the period, she is
spelled Anne both with and without an E. It was her second name, though, that
Dunn played on over and over. As much more loving as Moore sad. She first met
her, the third daughter of Sir George Moore, when she was only about 14 years
old and he was working as a secretary in Thomas Edgerton's household. She had
been sent to London to learn the ways of the city and the court and something in
her face or manner bludgeoned John Dunn in the heart. Given her father's wealth,
she was likely to have been fashionable and her clothes would have been good.
Stitching the labyrinth needle lace was the rage and necklines were having a
moment of extremes either rising high to the chin or scooped so low they skated
close to the nipple. But his poetry never describes her clothes or her body.
Dunn's metaphors are vivid, wild, evocative and potent, but they are strikingly
unspecific. It never occurred to him to tell us if she curved at the hip or
jutted at the collarbone or was taller than him. Presumably it was not what was
important. The hunger and the body itself were what mattered. Perhaps to look
for Anne in Dunn's verse is to misunderstand what the poems are doing. They're
not representations of her, but representations of him. Him watching her,
needing her, inventing for her. They are trumpet blasts across a hard land more
than they are portraits. In a valediction of My Name in a Window written in
1599, Dunn imagines etching his name with a diamond ring on a window and his
lover seeing her own reflection and his name intermingled. Tis much that glass
should be as all confessing and through shine as I. Tis more that it shows thee
to thee and clear reflects thee to thine eye. But all such rules, love's magic
can undo. Here you see me, and I am you. Her willingness to defy her father was
a remarkable thing. She must have had in her a flash of daring in a world that
insisted on obedience. She could only have met Dunn in secret, and secret places
were not easy to find. They might have been able to collide under the plausible
deniability of public spaces, books, popular walks, church. They might have
attended events in the evening. Pageants, which could be so crowded that silk-
clad bodies would press against each other. She took vast risks for him, larger
than he took for her. Spurred on by desire, or perhaps by Dunn's urgent
importuning, or by the wild optimism of youth, she risked gossip, scandal, and
perhaps at the very end, pregnancy. They may well have been lovers in the weeks
before they wed, hiding behind insouciant faces and very careful timing. She
gave a great, recklessly romantic leap into the dark. The landing was not to be
a soft one. Was he worth the sacrifice when she foresaw the thousand easier
futures that surrounded her? The alternatives would have been right in front of
her. She could have aimed for a life more like that of her cousin by marriage,
Elizabeth, who had that year been married off to Baron Hastings with all the
castles and gardens and wall hangings embroidered with unicorns that that
involved. What was done that she decided to risk her father's wrath in order to
share his days, his small income, his bed? If he took her to bed like he wrote,
if he knew how to render bodily his poetry, then he was worth sacrificing all
the wall hangings in England for. To read him, to read all of his love poems
together is to feel your self-change, for his is a passion which acknowledges
the strangeness you are born with. His best poetry is a triumphant call of
desire, sincerity, joke, all bound into one. It's there, for instance, in a
valediction forbidding mourning. The lovers are imagined as the two feet of a
pair of mathematical compasses joined eternally at the base. If they be two,
they are too so. As stiff twin compasses are two, thy soul, the fixed foot,
makes no show to move but doth if thother do. And though it in the centre sit
yet when thother, far, doth roam, it leans and hearkens after it, and grows
erect as it comes home. It is so extravagantly witty and so riotously plays only
by its own rules. It needed to be clever, because he demands that sex be
intelligent. It's the poem of a man who has the temerity and invention to see
the human condition in a piece of metal. It loves the body, because Dunn, unlike
so many of the highbrow poets who went before him, never pretended not to have a
body, grows erect as it comes home, is a pun so obvious it might as well be a
little sketch of a penis. But it is fundamental to his love poetry that the body
Dunn imagines isn't just a body. It transforms and becomes simultaneously other
things, a world, a state, a city, a planetary sweep. The lover looks at the
woman in The Good Morrow and sees a world atlas. Where can we find two fitter
hemispheres without sharp north, without declining west? In to his mistress
going to bed, the woman's girdle becomes a constellation of stars, and her body
is the entire world. Enough with that girdle like heaven's zone blistering, but
a far fairer world encompassing. And again, my kingdom's safeliest when with one
man manned. And the man in the sun rising chides the rising sun, declares, She
all states and all princes I. She becomes the world. What's thy duties be to
warm the world? That's Dunn in warming us. Shine here to us and thou art
everywhere. This bed thy center is. These walls thy sphere. Some of that woman
as state, woman as world is Dunn working in a tradition, but some of it was
personal. Dunn's relentless imagination was his single most constant feature.
His mind had ceaselessness built into it. It was to be throughout his life, a
site of new images, new theology, new doubts. Even those who disliked his work
acknowledged that he was a writer who had erupted through the old into the new.
But the always of that imagination must have been exhausting. For a mind like
that, sex, real sex, true sex, would allow a singleness to hush the
multitudinous mind. It's why so much of Dunn's imagery around sex is so
totalizing. The man and woman become one. The woman becomes a state, a country,
a planet. Sex for Dunn and those like him. Permission for those who watch the
world with such feverish care to turn one person into the world and to watch
only them. It was a transforming of his constant seeking for knowledge. To adore
and to devour and to be devoured is its own kind of focus, a gasp of a different
kind of oxygen. And so they married. The wedding took place about three weeks
before Christmas in 1601, according to Dunn. It was very small, no more than
five guests. After the wedding, Anne returned to her family home, Looseley Park,
in the countryside with her oblivious father as if nothing had happened, and
Dunn went back to his lodgings to wait and hope. To hope for what, beyond a good
moment to break the news, is hard to say. The moment didn't come. So in the end,
on the 2nd of February, almost two months after the wedding day, he wrote a
letter and sent it to his father-in-law via the 9th Earl of Northumberland,
Henry Percy. It wasn't by any reckoning a good letter. Dunn was aiming for both
humility and authority. He instead succeeded in sounding at once overconfident
and mildly unhinged. I knew my present estate less than fit for her. I knew, yet
I knew not why, that I stood not right in your opinion. I knew that to have
given any intimation of it had been to impossibilitate the whole matter. I know
this letter shall find you full of passion, but I know no passion can alter your
reason and wisdom to which I adventure to commend these particulars, that it is
irremediably Dunn. He spells it, the O-N-N-E, a fantastically inappropriate pun
on his own name, that if you incense my lord, you destroy her and me, that it is
easy to give us happiness, and that my endeavors and industry, if it please you
to prosper them, may soon make me somewhat worthier of her. It's multiple
requests rolled up in one, daughter and a job and forgiveness. From the point of
view of George Moore, with his notoriously quick temper and his aspirations to
nobility, it was a disaster, and might have formed a great alliance, have given
him titled in-laws with whom to socially machinate. Now she had bound herself to
a scribbling reprobate without property and with a dead religious traitor for
brother. Sir George went immediately to Dunn's employer, Thomas Edgerton, and
was still a minor, so Dunn had broken canon law. The case went to the city's
commissioners. Dunn was summarily dismissed from Edgerton's household, and to
his bewilderment, thrown into the Fleet Prison to await further investigation.
The Fleet Prison was simultaneously disgusting and expensive. At Detter's
prison, it didn't have the dignity and royal tinge of the tower. It stood on the
banks of the River Fleet in East London, and had a grill looking onto the street
through which prisoners could beg for arms. Prisons were profit-making
enterprises. You paid for each turn of the key, paid to have your irons removed,
paid for your food and lodging. Dunn's brother had died in one prison. Now he
was in another, and like Henry, he was growing increasingly desperately unwell.
On the 11th of February, locked in his cell, he wrote a more desperate plea to
Sir George. He no longer stood upon his pride. And though, perchance, you intend
not utter destruction, yet the way through which I fall towards it is so
headlong that being thus pushed I shall soon be at bottom. I have no refuge but
that of mercy which I beg of him, my lord, and you. This new, humbler letter
asked more to think of Anne. Dunn's fall from nuptial rebellion to obeisance was
very swift, fast enough to overturn his whole understanding of what you could
and couldn't talk your way around. Sir George sent word in return that he would
leave the matter up to Edgerton, who ordered that Dunn should be allowed to
return to his lodgings. He stayed there, under house arrest, in dark midwinter,
while the legality of his marriage to Anne was decided. Dunn's health began to
improve, but his life was still in chaos. While the High Commission deliberated,
he continued to send out flocks of letters. Some were to Sir George. In one he
reiterated his passion for Anne and begged permission to send a note to her.
Very slowly, George Moore began to come round. On the 27th of April 1602, the
Court of Audience declared Dunn's marriage good and sufficient. It was a very
unambiguous victory. A true and pure marriage, it was declared, had been
contracted between the said Anne Moore, alias Dunn, and John Dunn. Dunn was at
last allowed to take up his wife. Super Infinite by Catherine Rundle was read by
Blake Ritsen. The abridger was Richard Hamilton and the producer Ellen. We are
making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third party
services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you are listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. We are
looking for six robbers and three tons of gold. We ring every watch if you are
looking for the gold.