TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Nigeria's battle against the bandits. This is the BBC World Service, the
world's radio station. It's two hours GMT, I'm Charlotte Gallagher and this is
the Newsroom. Why Israel and America's special relationship is under pressure.
These comments were irresponsible, they were repugnant, they were disgusting.
We'll be live in Washington getting the answers from our correspondent. How the
origins of Covid-19 are still being argued over. Will we ever know the truth?
The mystery and the misery of Havana syndrome. We understand that people truly
went through an ordeal and that's something that clearly our colleagues and
their families had to deal with. So where in Greece where there have been
protests following a deadly train crash and Prince Harry and Meghan are told to
leave their UK home. All that to come, first the news. BBC News, hello, I'm
Gareth Barlow. The United States has denounced comments by Israel's far-right
finance minister, Bezal el-Smotrich, who had called for the Palestinian village
of Huara to be wiped out. The village in the occupied West Bank was the scene of
a rampage by Jewish settlers on Sunday. David Willis reports. Bezal el-Smotrich,
who leads a pro-settler party, was quoted as saying he believed the village
needed to be, as he put it, erased. Mr Smotrich later said his comments had been
misinterpreted by the media but he nonetheless doubled down by saying that Huara
had become a terrorist outpost, as he put it, for those intent on launching
attacks against the Jews. In response, the US State Department spokesman Ned
Price called the comments irresponsible, repugnant and disgusting and called on
Benjamin Netanyahu and other senior Israeli officials to publicly disavow them.
The Greek Prime Minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, says a committee of experts will
investigate the cause of Tuesday night's rail disaster, the worst in Greece's
living memory. At least 43 people, many of them young students, were killed when
two trains collided. Nick Beek is our correspondent in Greece. A station master
in a nearby city has now been charged with manslaughter by negligence and
already the country's Prime Minister says tragic human error was to blame. But
that has sparked anger overnight, including in the capital Athens, because for
years there have been warnings the rail network was not safe. Visiting the
wreckage, Greece's transport minister became emotional as he talked about the
country's failing train network and later resigned. It's not known exactly how
many passengers are missing, but many families now face an agonising wait.
Foreign ministers from the G20 group of major economies are meeting shortly in
the Indian capital Delhi, with divisions over Ukraine likely to dominate the
agenda. India, which holds the presidency of the G20, has taken a neutral stance
on the conflict. It will try to steer today's agenda towards the needs of poorer
nations. More than half of Argentina was left without power for several hours on
Wednesday after a fire affected the national electricity grid. The blaze struck
high-tension power lines. The BBC's Will Grant reports. An estimated 20 million
Argentinians have been affected by the blackout at its height, and daily life
has been brought to a halt in some regions, with classes suspended and
businesses shuttered. While living without air conditioning or refrigeration is
fraying the nerves of many residents, the biggest complications are in the major
cities. An estimated 150,000 people are still without power in the Buenos Aires
metropolitan area. The energy ministry is confident of restoring power soon, but
the political cost to the government of President Alberto Fernandez could be
more lasting. World News from the BBC. New York City has agreed to pay just over
$21,000 each to hundreds of demonstrators who were penned in by police during
racial justice protests in 2020. It follows a lawsuit brought by five of the
demonstrators who accused the officers of a brutal response to the protests that
followed the murder of George Floyd. Researchers on Easter Island have found a
previously undiscovered Moai, one of the Pacific Island nation's distinctive
stone statues, in a dry lake bed. It was found by a team visiting the area
around the Ranurakaku volcano, where several of the monolithic human figures
were damaged in a serious fire last year. Archaeologists say they hope there may
be more of the statues at the site, which was underwater until recently.
Analysis shows that last year's NASA mission to change the course of an asteroid
by smashing into it with a spacecraft was surprisingly successful. Astronomers'
video reveals that when the probe, travelling at 6 kilometres a second, collided
with the astronaut, it caused the space rock to speed up its orbit four times
more than predicted. And ornithologists are celebrating the sighting of a dusky
tetrica, a yellow-throated songbird native to Madagascar, which was feared to
have become extinct. The bird hadn't been seen since 1999. With more details,
Tracey Bircham reports. The dusky tetrica was once on the top ten most-wanted
lost birds list, after eluding scientists for 24 years. Now three of the rare
ground-dwelling songbirds have been sighted in recent weeks, during an
expedition into the remote rainforests of northeast Madagascar. Excited
ornithologists say the discovery may cause a rewriting of textbooks, as the
birds were seen on rocky banks by mountain streams, not previously thought to be
its natural habitat. Scientists say this may explain why they haven't been seen,
or indeed heard, for so long, as the sound of rushing water would have drowned
out the birds' calls. Live from London, that's the latest BBC World News. Hello,
you're listening to the Newsroom from the BBC World Service with me, Charlotte
Gallagher. The US has been a strong supporter of Israel for decades, sending it
billions of dollars in aid and providing political support. But comments by
Israel's far-right finance minister, Betzel Smotrich, have incensed Washington.
He called for a Palestinian village to be wiped out. That was Huwara, which had
already been ransacked and set on fire by Jewish settlers after two Israelis
were killed. Ned Price from the US State Department called on the Israeli Prime
Minister to condemn Mr. Smotrich. These comments were irresponsible, they were
repugnant, they were disgusting. And just as we condemn Palestinian incitement
to violence, we condemn these provocative remarks that also amount to incitement
to violence. We call on Prime Minister Netanyahu and other senior Israeli
officials to publicly and clearly reject and disavow these comments. Mr.
Smotrich did later backtrack, saying what he wanted was a heavy price to be
exacted against what he called terrorists in the village. Let's talk to our
correspondent in the US now, David Willis. David, really strong words from the
US, kind of unthinkable not so long ago. How serious a warning is this to the
Israeli government? I think this warning is in line with those from the UK and
the EU, Charlotte, who both express concern over the violence in Huwara and have
called on Israel to tackle such settler rampages. Like them, the United States
is well aware that the current government is the most right wing in Israel's
history. And despite calls by some Israeli politicians, the Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu among them, for people to not take the law into their own
hands, there are those who, like the gentleman you mentioned, Betzel El-
Smotrich, who have made no secret of the fact that they want to see tougher
action taken against Palestinians in the West Bank by this new government. And
the Biden administration fears a further increase in violence in the run up to
Ramadan, of course, at the end of this month. And it wants to calm the tensions
arising from this latest outbreak of violence in the West Bank and the protests
surrounding judicial reform in Israel as well. Yes, because Mr Biden did warn Mr
Netanyahu not to go ahead with those planned changes to the judicial system. So
it's not the first time they've issued this warning to Israel. It's not. And the
White House, as I say, very much hoping to calm the situation. Hence the State
Department's repudiation of Betzel El-Smotrich's comments as irresponsible,
repugnant, disgusting, and their call for Mr Netanyahu and other senior Israeli
officials to disavow those incendiary remarks. But Mr Smotrich is one of
Benjamin Netanyahu's ultra-nationalist, ultra-orthodox allies who've secured top
positions in this new government. He's a firebrand settler leader who's now in
charge of much of the Israeli government's policy in regards to the West Bank.
And despite accusing the media of misquoting him, as you mentioned, over the
comments about how the Palestinian village of Huwara should be wiped out, Mr
Smotrich has also said that he believes that village has become a terrorist
outpost, as he put it, for those seeking to launch attacks against Jews. And
he's urged tough action against militants and their supporters. So despite those
weekend talks in Jordan, after which it was said that both sides had agreed to
de-escalate the tension in the region, there really is little evidence of that
on the ground. And that is worrying officials in the Biden administration. I
just wanted to ask, David, how difficult is this balancing act for Joe Biden?
Because he doesn't want to alienate supporters of Israel in the US that perhaps
might vote Democrat, but he also wants to send a strong message to Israel. Is
that quite a difficult balancing act for him? It is. And you're absolutely
right. There's a lot of support amongst the Jewish diaspora here for Democrats.
And so he doesn't want to alienate them. But at the same time, as I mentioned,
this is the most right-wing Israeli government in memory. And he clearly has
some concerns about the direction it could take or looks to be taking. David,
thank you. That was our correspondent in the US, David Willis. It's been three
years since the coronavirus pandemic began in the Chinese city of Wuhan, and we
still don't know how it happened. The FBI now says Covid-19 most likely
originated in a Chinese government-controlled lab, though it hasn't offered any
fresh scientific evidence. And other American intelligence agencies have drawn
different conclusions. Our correspondent John Sudworth was in China when the
outbreak began. He's now in New York and told me more. This all came about as a
result of the intelligence review that President Biden ordered back in 2021. And
we have known for some time that the FBI's position was to conclude with
moderate confidence, they said, that the lab leak was the most likely scenario.
What's interesting in recent days is that we have heard that the US Energy
Department has changed its intelligence assessment now to come around in support
of the FBI position. So things are shifting a little. We are told that four
intelligence agencies still believe that the natural origin for Covid, the idea
that it somehow crossed naturally from animals to humans, perhaps in a wildlife
market in Wuhan, four agencies believe that that is the most likely scenario and
two are undecided. What do you think this will do for China-US relations? Well,
I mean, could it get any worse? I suppose you have to ask. You know, you can
hear in the Chinese reaction that this will not go down well in Beijing. They
are accusing the United States of political manipulation on this question.
Although what we can say, though, I think if we had to sort of step back from
that, that those obvious questions that some scientists have suggested might by
this stage at least have begun to be answered, you know, might the virus have
been discovered in a host animal in China? Well, apparently not. There has been
no clues to a natural origin found in that regard. Could patient samples in
Wuhan hospitals in the weeks and months before the outbreak give us clues as to
the origin of the virus? Again, China says it has found nothing. Might China
have investigated the laboratories in Wuhan to see what samples they were
holding and what sort of experiments were being conducted? Well, if it has, it
hasn't told us. And I think it's in the absence of information that the
intelligence agencies are struggling to come up with anything that looks like a
consensus. You obviously were in China for part of the pandemic. What were
people saying at the time? You know, were people looking at the lab in China or
the wet market? And how do you think they'll be taking it, normal Chinese
people, that the US are accusing this lab leak? It's a really interesting
question and quite a complicated one. I mean, at the beginning, absolutely
questions were being asked on the Chinese internet about the possibility of a
lab leak. That's where I first saw the possibility being raised. That was very
quickly, as you might expect, nipped in the bud by the Chinese censors. And
China has had huge success since in shifting the narrative. Before I left China,
back in early 2021, almost anybody you spoke to would say that they now believed
that the pandemic did not begin in China. So forget lab leak, forget natural
origin. China has pushed back in terms of its own propaganda very effectively at
the very idea that it started in China at all. That was John Sudworth. A mystery
illness called Havana syndrome has baffled doctors and the intelligence
community since it was first reported in 2016. Diplomats at the American embassy
in Cuba started complaining of severe headaches, ringing in the ears and nausea.
At first, Washington claimed the symptoms might have been the result of
malicious actions by a foreign adversary. But a new US intelligence assessment
now says that's highly unlikely. Our Cuba correspondent, Will Grant, has been
telling me more. The decision that was reached in this intelligence report,
which was at least two years in the making, involved seven different
intelligence agencies, is that there wasn't an unnamed, hostile foreign
government behind it using some kind of previously unknown sonic weapon, as was
perhaps believed at one stage, or possibly as some kind of byproduct from
electronic surveillance of US diplomats in Havana. And you lived full time in
Havana at the time of this Havana syndrome. What were people saying to you and
how worried were people? It was very, very worrying for those in the diplomatic
service at the time. I remember other diplomatic teams were very concerned about
their staff. And, you know, it was it was something that was causing a ripple in
Havana, no doubt about it. I mean, what was interesting is that the Cubans right
from the very start were at pains to point out that they didn't believe it was
anything that could be linked to some kind of foreign government on their soil,
acting either in conjunction with the Cubans or on their own to attack US
personnel. They were very clear about that. And we understand that Raul Castro
specifically spoke to the US ambassador at the time to make that point that he
had nothing to do with it. And, you know, as far as he was concerned, Cuba
wasn't involved. So it was, of course, later used as a pretext by which to shut
down, essentially shutter the US embassy in Havana. Almost all personnel, except
the very, very skeleton staff, were sent home. Of course, a lot of those staff
had been affected. Many of them had their careers curtailed. They've
subsequently received compensation from the US government. But throughout it
all, both Russia, where I think a lot of the fingers were being pointed,
particularly in Congress, and of course, Cuba, were over and over dismissing the
claims that they were involved in some kind of, you know, coordinated attack on
US personnel. Despite the fact that there are lots of different embassies in
Cuba, it was only US staff. No other country were involved, or were they? It
was. I think there was a suggestion at one point that maybe one or two Canadian
staff had also been affected. But essentially, yes, it was only US staff. And
then the reason, of course, that it then became dubbed Havana syndrome. But the
reason the kind of pressure eased from Cuba is because it became very, very
apparent that it was then appearing elsewhere all over the world, wherever the
US had embassies or there were military personnel affected, people well beyond
the purview of anything to do with US-Cuba relations. It was clear that it was
something that stretched well beyond the Caribbean. That was Will Grant. You're
listening to the BBC World Service. Next, after the disaster, the protest. This
was the scene on the streets of Athens this evening. People were protesting
after more than 40 people were confirmed killed in a crash when a train on its
way home from Athens to Thessaloniki hit a freight train. It wasn't long before
the police responded. Tear gas rounds being fired on the streets. The tough
official response stood in sharp contrast, though, to the tone adopted earlier
by the Greek Prime Minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis. Justice will do its own work.
Responsibilities will be assigned. Meanwhile, the state will stand by the
families of the victims. We will mourn our children, our siblings, our friends.
We will remain united in this tragedy as well. And then we will bow our heads
and clench our teeth. We will work to ensure that this never again that I heard
in Larissa is not an empty word. I promise you that. The transport minister has
already resigned and local media say a station master who's been charged with
manslaughter by negligence has acknowledged mistakenly routing a train on the
wrong track. Our correspondent Nick Beek spoke to us from outside a hospital in
Larissa. This is one of the hospitals where survivors have been treated, but
it's also a place where relatives have been coming to give their DNA so that
their missing loved ones may be identified in the hours or days to come. I've
just been talking to one surgeon here and he says that those 43 people who have
been identified, it's believed they were in the third and fourth carriages. And
when you look at the images of the first and second carriages, which were all
but destroyed, it really does mean that the number of people who have been
killed here is likely to increase. The Greek prime minister has described this
as a tragic human error, but for many people that simply doesn't cut it because
there have been repeated warnings about the state of the railways here. Lots of
people it would seem have had safety concerns. And so what we're seeing tonight
is as well as the mourning, a real sense of anger. And there have been some
protests in the capital Athens, peaceful and otherwise. And as the country
enters three days of national mourning, many people are saying this simply isn't
acceptable. And some are wondering whether any sort of investigation on a
national level or here in this city will really do it justice and do justice to
the people who have died. So this is a dark day for Greece. This is the worst
railway disaster in its history. Nick Beek. Next, Bolo Tenubu has been nicknamed
the Mr Fix-It of Nigerian politics. But as the president-elect prepares to take
over, he faces several challenges, including mass corruption and a weakening
economy. One of his main priorities will be rising insecurity, which has plagued
almost all corners of the country. Our reporter Alex Last has been to northwest
Nigeria, where criminal bandit gangs have been attacking rural communities. One
morning a few months ago, Jibril was out in the fields with his dad and brother
when at 10am out of nowhere, men carrying AK-47s appeared on motorbikes. So
first one of the bandits held me with a knife to my throat and threatened to
slit it if I moved. And then one of the other bandits raised his gun and shot my
elder brother twice. He died. And then they took the handle of my dad's hoe.
They clopped him until they thought they had killed him. They said to me, are
you coming with us? And I said, OK. Jibril was one of many villagers taken that
day, held hostage in a remote bandit camp for weeks. He was eventually released
for a ransom of around $1,000, a crippling amount for a poor family. In the last
few years, powerful criminal bandit gangs have raided villages, ambushed
vehicles, killing and kidnapping thousands. In response, the military has been
conducting rolling anti-bandit operations. Yukubu, not his real name, is a
Nigerian soldier. Whenever we come face to face with the bandits, a fight will
break out. It is a fight to the finish, kill or be killed. But despite a huge
security budget, troops say they often find themselves outgunned by bandits. We
don't have enough fighting equipment, but certainly the weapons that the bandits
have are even more sophisticated than our own. With the army overstretched,
controversially, the state has also been relying heavily on thousands of local
vigilantes. But vigilantes have been accused of extrajudicial killings. In a
country with a history of communal violence, where politicians have often co-
opted armed groups, some fear empowering vigilantes will just create another
kind of monster. The real solution, says Edayet Hassan of the Nigerian NGO, the
Centre for Democracy and Development, is for Nigeria's new leaders to address
the underlying problems that fuel not just the bandit crisis, but wider
insecurity across the country. The root causes are the same. The land-issue
challenges, the justice issues, the poverty issues, the proliferation of harm
and ammunition, the feeling of marginalization, both real and perceived,
corruption. All the issues are just the absence of the state. It will not be
easy for anybody that comes in, but the person will have to rebuild the trust
with Nigerians. That was Alex Last reporting. Now Paul Sarras joins us with the
latest sports news. Gabrielle Martinelli scored twice with Bukaya Saka and
Martin Odegaard also on the score sheet as Arsenal thrashed Everton 4-0 at the
Emirates to move five points clear at the top of the English Premier League. The
Gunners boss, Mikkel Arteta, was delighted with the win against a tough side.
This league, that's a different story and we had a big proof of that when we
played at Goodison and this team played at Anfield and it made it really
difficult for Liverpool as well. So we knew that, so really pleased with the
performance, the maturity and the quality that we showed today. Elsewhere,
Liverpool were 2-0 winners over struggling Wolves at Anfield, thanks to goals
from Virgil van Dijk and Mohamed Salah. The English League Cup winners,
Manchester United, came from a goal down to beat West Ham 3-1 and set up an FA
Cup quarter-final against Fulham at Old Trafford. The United boss, Eric Ten Hag,
was pleased with his side's resilience. Once again this team showed character
and personality and when you come down, especially after Sunday, after all the
good celebrations, after also all the positive criticism, and then doing
something with players, with the team, and you have to deal with it. Elsewhere,
fourth-tier Groomsby Town beat English Premier League side Southampton 2-1 at St
Mary's to reach the quarter-finals of the FA Cup for the first time in 84 years.
They travel to Brighton next. Sheffield United will host Blackburn Rovers in the
last eight after a 1-0 win over Tottenham at Bramall Lane. Burnley beat
Fleetwood Town 1-0 and go to Manchester City next. In cricket, the former
England bowler Tim Bresnan used a racial slur towards Azeem Rafiq's sister, the
first day of a hearing into allegations of racism at Yorkshire County Cricket
Club has been told. Rafiq claimed Bresnan used the term towards his sister Amna
during a media day at Headingley in 2014. Bresnan is not taking part in the
disciplinary process and denies the allegation. That was Paul Sarras. Prince
Harry and Meghan have confirmed they've been asked to leave their home in the
UK. Frogmore Cottage in the grounds of Windsor Castle was given to the couple in
2019. But that was before they announced they no longer wanted to be working
members of the royal family and began giving interviews and writing books which
embarrassed Buckingham Palace. Our royal correspondent Sarah Campbell reports.
Frogmore Cottage is where Prince Harry, Meghan and their children have stayed on
their infrequent trips back to the UK. Sources close to the couple say they
thought of it as their forever home, a gift from the late Queen. That they've
been asked to leave is, the BBC understands, a source of disappointment. One
concern of theirs is understood to be safety and security. Where now will the
Prince stay with his family when visiting the UK? The logistics are still being
sorted out, with financial issues to be resolved. Not least that the couple paid
£2.4 million back to the Treasury to cover renovation costs and rent. Buckingham
Palace says this is a private family matter. Reports that Prince Andrew has been
offered Frogmore Cottage have not been confirmed. Sarah Campbell. Finally, when
scientists in Australia saw whales feeding in a certain way, it reminded them of
something. That was the way ancient sea monsters were described as acting in old
Norse sagas. At first they thought it was just a coincidence. Now they think the
feeding technique, which scientists had assumed had just developed recently, was
noticed by ancient poets. Terry Egan is following the story and joins me now.
Well, as you know, Charlotte, old literature is full of weird and wonderful
creatures, among them from Norse mythology, the Huff-Goofer, which sounds like
something out of J.K. Rowling, Lord of the Rings. It does. I know. Now, I hope
you haven't just eaten anything, but the Huff-Goofer was described as luring
fish into its jaws by vomiting and emitting a particular smell. Delicious. Then,
I know, then trapping the fish in its mouth. The Huff-Goofer appeared in the
Norse sagas, but might go back further than that. There are hints of sea
monsters doing just this in Greek manuscripts from around 300 AD. But what
scientists have now realised is that this is exactly the way some whales have
been seen to behave. Humpbacks and brides' whales, they use a technique called
trap feeding. It was identified after 2010 and in 2021 hundreds of anchovies
were filmed jumping into a whale's mouth off the Gulf of Thailand. How did these
saga writers know about this? Well, the suggestion here is that medieval
seafarers a thousand years ago might have seen the whales behaving in this way.
Why the fish jump in is not really clear, but it could very well be that the
whale belches up half-eaten food and that gives off this particular irresistible
smell described in the ancient texts, irresistible to the fish, of course. The
weird behaviour described there is just whale behaviour that we hadn't noticed
before, but funnily enough our ancestors did. That's a very weird and wonderful
story there from Terry Egan. You've been listening to the Newsroom from the BBC
World Service with me, Charlotte Gallagher, and there's news coming up next.
This is the BBC World Service, where we're hearing about the women who made
waves in the US surfing community. I'm Patty Paniccia and I was a pro surfer
back in the 1970s. I'm just very happy to see the sport of women's surfing
progressing to a good professional calibre. Ben Boyer and I were part of a
surfing revolution at a time when 1960s attitudes toward women were still
powerful. You know, the male dominance of the administration of the sport kept
women's surfing from growing. The men were angry, they thought it was a joke,
but then Margot Obert placed ahead of a couple men. Now I'm travelling from
California to Hawaii to meet up with some of the people who were part of that
revolution, as well as some of today's top surf stars. I think all the girls
from nowadays have no idea what it was like back then. Women pro surfers,
battling the waves, at bbcworldservice.com slash documentaries or wherever you
get your podcasts. Hello and welcome to Assignment from the BBC World Service
with me, Alex Slast, here in northern Nigeria, where in the last few years,
powerful bandit gangs have killed and kidnapped thousands of people. I thought
that is the end of me. I was certain they were going to kill me because I had
just witnessed them murder two people. So how can Nigeria's new leaders-in-
waiting end the bandit crisis? Join me after the world news. BBC News with
Gareth Barlow. The United States has denounced comments by Israel's far-right
finance minister, Betzel Smodrich, calling for the Palestinian village of Huara
to be wiped out as repugnant and disgusting. A Palestinian was killed when
Jewish settlers rampaged there on Sunday in apparent revenge for the killing of
two Israeli brothers. Greece's prime minister says a team of experts will
investigate the country's worst ever rail disaster, which has killed at least 43
people. He said human error was probably to blame, but rail workers say the
network has been suffering from neglect and technical faults. They are to strike
nationwide on Thursday. More than half of Argentina was without power for
several hours after a wildfire hit the national electricity grid amid a heat
wave. Supply is now slowly resuming. Foreign ministers from the G20 major
economies are meeting shortly in the Indian capital, Delhi, with divisions over
the war in Ukraine likely to surface. India, which holds the gathering's
presidency, takes a neutral stance on the conflict. Over 100 girls in Iran have
been admitted to hospital with symptoms of poisoning. It comes after dozens more
girls' schools were subjected to likely gas attacks. The perpetrators are
unclear. New York City will pay more than $21,000 each to hundreds of
demonstrators who were penned in by police during anti-racism protests in 2020.
It sued the police department, alleging brutality. Researchers on Easter Island
have found a previously undiscovered moai, one of the Pacific Island's
distinctive stone statues, in a dry lake bed. It's hoped there may be more
statues at the same site, which was until recently underwater. And
ornithologists are delighted. They say that a rare songbird, the dusty tetrica,
has been sighted in Madagascar for the first time in 24 years. Police end fears
that it had become extinct. That's the latest BBC News. The sun is setting in a
dust-filled haze here in the scorching plains of northwestern Nigeria. And
hundreds have gathered in an outdoor amphitheatre in the city of Katsina to
watch Dembe, traditional northern Nigerian boxing. On a raised platform, two
fighters stand in a ring of sand. They're wiry, stripped to the waist. Their
left arms are tightly wrapped with rope. That's their hitting arm. And they're
sizing each other up, poised to attack. And suddenly the fighting begins. The
fights can appear brutal, but rules apply. They do show that life in the city
still beats to its traditional rhythm. For in the countryside just beyond, a
very different kind of fight is taking place. A fight that's deadly, in which it
seems there are no rules. Where heavily armed criminal gangs of bandits, some
100 strong, attack villagers, ambush vehicles, killing and kidnapping men, women
and children. Nigeria's new leaders-in-waiting have promised to end insecurity
around the country. And the bandit threat is one of the priorities. So how is
the state battling bandits? And what does it say about the future of security in
Africa's most populous nation? I'm Alex Last, and welcome to Assignment from the
BBC World Service. And I should warn you, this program contains descriptions of
violence. We had finished working on the farm, getting ready to come back, when
the bandits with guns arrived on motorbikes. One morning a few months ago, not
far from the city of Katsina, Jibril was out in the fields with his dad and
brother, farming their small plot of land, when at 10am, out of nowhere, men
carrying AK-47s appeared on motorbikes. So first they come up to my father and
ordered him to climb onto the back of their bike. He said, where are you taking
me to? And they said we're kidnappers. And he told them he wasn't going. And
they said, well, we'll kill you. And he said, go ahead. If you kill me, it means
my time has come. So the bandits said, well, you think you are ready to die,
we'll show you, we'll not just kill you, we'll kill all of you. One of the
bandits held me with a knife to my throat and threatened to slit it if I moved.
And then one of the other bandits raised his gun and shot my elder brother
twice. He died. And then they took the handle of my dad's hoe and began beating
him with it. They clobbed him until they thought they had killed him. And they
said to me, are you coming with us? And I said, OK. Further across the field,
another farmer, Abubakar, was watching. When the shots rang out, he took off
running. Chased and with nowhere to hide, soon he was caught. Other villagers
were rounded up too. Then herded by bandits on motorbikes, they were forced to
run into the bush, the start of a long journey into captivity. I thought that is
the end of me. I was certain they were going to kill me because I had just
witnessed them murder two people. The bandits' camp was in the forest. There,
Abubakar's ordeal was just beginning. They blindfolded us, tied our hands
tightly behind our backs and they chained our legs. Then they will freak one of
us to take away to be tortured. They beat us with all sorts of things. I have
scars all over. They did this over and over. And once they got my relatives on
the phone to negotiate the ransom, a group of about ten bandits will surround me
and begin torturing me. So my relatives will hear my screams. You know no one
want to die, but I pray that I was dead so the torture will end. There was
another bandit camp far away from us. And a few times the military aircraft went
over and dropped bombs there. Still we could feel the vibration of the bomb when
it dropped. And the idea is that I wish those bombs were dropped on us so that
we together with the bandits will all die. The bandits finally agreed to release
Abubakar for a ransom of around $1,000, a staggering amount for a desperately
poor farmer. Relatives scraped together the ransom, selling plots of land and
property. A similar amount was paid for Jibril. And in the end they were
released, but Abubakar is still deeply traumatized. Ever since I have been
living in fear, I used to travel a lot. But now I hardly go anywhere because of
that fear. And I find it very difficult to sleep at night, because what happened
to me replays over and over in my mind. In the last few years around 100
powerful bandit groups have emerged across a swathe of northwest and central
Nigeria. It's thought that there are around 30,000 men in total under arms. The
bandit leaders act like mini warlords, each with their own mini army, on
motorbikes. Attacks are sporadic. Mass killings and abductions make headlines.
But the low-level day-to-day violence does not. And it's the communities and
travellers in rural areas who bear the brunt. Thousands have been killed.
Thousands more have been kidnapped for ransom. The bandit problem in Nigeria is
a hydra-headed monster. It's one that is big and capable of swallowing this
country. Edayat Hassan is director of the Nigerian NGO, the Centre for Democracy
and Development, which has researched the bandit crisis. More than a million
people have been affected by this conflict. It's impacting on the whole of
society in terms of security, the ability to move from one place to the other,
the ability to access education for the young children and even food security
because most of this impacted part of Nigeria, a largely agrarian economy. So
what's going on? Armed gangs and kidnapping for ransom are not new phenomena in
Nigeria, but few have seen it on this scale, especially in the northwest. It's
not about some extremist religious ideology like the Boko Haram insurgency in
the northeast. But the bandits' origins share common themes. Poverty and
unemployment, feelings of marginalization and injustice. In this case,
especially among some of Nigeria's ethnic Fulani community. Fulani traditionally
roam with cattle, but have faced increasing conflicts with farmers over access
to water and pasture. A battle exacerbated by climate change, a growing
population and the appropriation of traditional grazing lands for farming. I've
spoken to bandit leaders who have said, listen, this conflict started as a
grievance-driven conflict where some of the Fulani heirs felt that the Nigerian
state has marginalized them economically, educationally, and also they have felt
the lack of justice, where they are saying that their cattle have actually been
roasted and they have not been able to get justice from the Nigerian state,
where they are saying that their people have actually been killed, they've not
been able to get justice. And this sense of hopelessness was what drove the
conflict at that point. And so a few gave up on the old life and turned to
banditry. With so many other young men across the region desperate for money,
there was no shortage of recruits. The fact remains that while many bandit
groups, they have Fulanis in it, they also have ethnic groups including Hausa,
Kanuri, people from all parts, which makes it very difficult to discern what
exactly they are asking for, what is their objective. And it's now become a
business where people are just busy making a lot of money, particularly as they
started kidnapping for ransom, they started rustling cattle, people can buy
guns, and that also grants them the opportunity to have power, which many people
do yearn for. And certainly it appears intoxicating. In this phone footage,
hundreds of bandits in an assortment of camouflage uniforms are having a party
in a camp in the forest. They take great delight showing off the vast array of
sophisticated weapons they've acquired. Faced with this sort of threat,
understandably many people have simply fled the countryside. Thousands of those
who've been forced to flee their homes have come here to Katsina, a place of
relative safety. And many have come to this neighbourhood of the city. The dusty
mud roads are lined by single-storey concrete houses. There's a few sheep tied
up at posts in the shade and some chickens too. Dark channels of waste water
running down the middle of the street. This is now the temporary home to a man
we'll call Bello, as he doesn't want to be identified. He's tall and thin,
dressed in a dark red gown, and sits on a mat on the floor of his small
compound. His village lies just over half an hour's drive away, a rural
community that was once home to 25,000 people, but not anymore. Bandits attacked
us on a daily basis. Now they've taken over our town. A few thousand residents
remain there. Most fled because the bandits can do whatever they feel like doing
to the residents of the town. They're in control of your life. They're in
control of your kids. You know that you could be in your house and the bandits
will come. If a bandit wants to sleep with your wife, you can do nothing about
it. You will rape her and go. Like many in his area, Bello's family is
ethnically mixed, a combination of both local Hauser farmers and Fulani herders.
After all, the communities have lived together for generations and many
intermarried. And some of their young men have left to join the bandits. These
bandits, we know them, and the bandits also know us. We are related. Some of
them are our children. Some of them are our grandchildren. In the beginning,
there were usual clashes between herders and farmers. We would fight with clubs
and machetes, but disputes would be resolved. But over time, some young men went
to the bush seeking to make money. They set up a camp and became bandits.
Eventually, they started having guns, modern weapons, and they started raiding
the villages. At first, when they came into the village, they would fire some
shots to scare people and would kill a couple of people and set some houses
ablaze just to instill fear into the other members of the community. We couldn't
confront them because they were armed with modern guns. So gradually, gradually,
that fear got into us and we started running away from these guys. Dozens have
been kidnapped from his village, but now few can afford to pay ransoms. In some
areas, those who can't pay just have to work for the bandits, while some gangs
simply charge villages a fee not to attack. But whatever the situation, safety
is not guaranteed. Before, if you had a bandit in your family, it gave you some
protection. But now that doesn't work anymore. It doesn't stop them from coming
to attack you or prevent another bandit group coming to attack you. The
situation has gotten out of control. They just go and attack anybody, whether
fulani or hausa. And the fulani are really suffering. They have lost their
cattle. They lost their homes. You know, even the bandits themselves are not
safe from other bandits. Sometimes a bigger and stronger bandit group will come
and raid them. So that is the situation now. Nobody is safe. Nobody is
protected. It's survival of the fittest. You might be wondering, what about the
police? In total, Nigeria has around 300,000 police officers. But at least half
are actually assigned to protect wealthy Nigerians and VIPs in towns and cities,
which means that in many rural areas, like in Bello's village, there's almost no
police presence. There's a temporary police outpost. It's not manned
permanently. Occasionally, they send police there, but they send just five
policemen, and only two will have guns. And that's it. Even on a normal day,
those five policemen cannot secure a community of about 25,000 people. And even
if police come here, when they come, they don't go after the bandits, you know.
I suspect that the reason is that they know that if they die in service, no one
will provide for their families. So they don't want to risk fighting the
bandits. When the police come, the bandits stay out of the village and wait,
because they know that the policemen won't stay for long. If a community wants
the police to stay any time, it has to provide for them and roast goats and cows
for them to eat. The bustling city of Katsina is festooned with election
billboards, beaming faces of politicians who promised to bring wealth and
happiness to all. Nigerian leaders have said security is their priority, for if
you drive not far out of town, you're soon in bandit country. So how is the
battle against the bandits going? In this video shared on social media, Nigerian
soldiers are shown battling bandits across open fields and bush, securing the
release of relieved hostages who run across fields towards the camera. Let's go,
let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go. They are releasing them, they are
releasing them, they are coming. Now people, now people. Let's go, let's go,
let's go, let's go, let's go. That is our RPG. They are releasing them, they are
releasing them. Look at them, they are coming. For the last few years, the
Nigerian army has been conducting rolling anti-bandit operations across northern
Nigeria. Once you go out on operations into the bush, you never know what awaits
you. Whenever we come face to face with the bandits, a fight will break out. It
is a fight to the finish, kill or be killed, and we are ready to make that
sacrifice for the nation and for the citizens of this country. Yakubu, not his
real name, is a Nigerian soldier who we met one night in a northern Nigerian
town. He's not got permission to talk. He was wounded fighting bandits. We were
just passing along the road on patrol, you know, and then the bandits ambushed
us. They tried to cut the road. The bandits opened fire on us and so we had to
return fire. That was how the firefight started and we fought fiercely and it
was in the process that I got injured. Despite vast amounts of money being
assigned to the security budget, at times he says the Nigerian army is outgunned
by the bandits. That's one of the major challenges we have. We don't have enough
fighting equipment, but certainly the weapons that the bandits have are even
more sophisticated than our own. When I was shot in the battle with the bandits,
it was only for the grace of God that I escaped with my life because they were
better equipped. They were better armed than us, but because we are
professionals, we have the training and of course God is on our side. That was
why we managed to survive that encounter with the enemy. We even killed lots of
them despite the equipment we have. The army is already stretched, not least
dealing with the Islamist insurgency in the northeast and bandits do operate
over a vast area. So the military has been using airstrikes, they can be
effective, but as in any conflict they do not always hit the right target and
civilians have at times paid a terrible price. And while many see the armed
forces as their saviour, they don't have a great human rights record. Security
forces have been accused of ethnic profiling, targeting innocent Falani herders
in their sweeps against suspected bandits. Some people are on the front line in
more ways than one, because in the battle against bandits, the Nigerian state
has been harnessing another lesson from its war against Boko Haram and that's
the use of vigilantes. They even have a theme song. In an office in Katsina, a
man in khaki uniform and a red beret sits behind a desk flanked by his
lieutenants. He's the local chief of the vigilante group of Nigeria. Good
afternoon. Thank you so much. My name is Comrade Salusul Abu Kulfi. I'm the
state commander and here I am together with my lieutenants. The work we are
doing is many. We are complementing and supplementing the effort of the Nigerian
police and all other security agencies. We are assisting our people. Like now
just when you have come, I have received a call saying that they want an
assistance. Just as you come now, just as you entered into my office now, bandit
activities. Even yesterday, two days before, bandits, they slaughtered two of
our members. They slaughtered them, cut off his hand and put fire on the body.
Despite the risks, he says he has 70,000 volunteers, dwarfing the few thousand
security personnel presently in his state. His recruits come from local
communities and they are the first line of defence. But perhaps their greatest
weapon is in gathering intelligence and he says they have informers everywhere.
And you have a lot of people gathering intelligence? We have a lot. We have a
lot. We have cripples. We have disabled. We have lepers. We have clinics. Our
people are there. Market. Our people are even in your house. We know the places.
We know the bandits. We know their house. We know everything. Are you winning
the battle against the bandits? We are winning. Of course. We eliminate them.
But it is a constant battle. While driving through Katsina, our producer, Kaura,
kept getting updates. The head of vigilante sent me this message saying that
gunmen entered a village called Kukar, Babengida, rustled cattle and camels.
They killed three members of the vigilante. How many attacks is that? Based on
the messages he's been sending me, 10, 11, 12, 13. 13 attacks in about two
weeks. And that's just Katsina State? Yes. Kukar, Babengida, not more than 10
kilometers from Katsina. Yeah, it's about 10, 15 kilometers from Katsina town,
where we are. So it's very close. It's close by. Suddenly there's no love lost
between vigilantes and bandits. In this video from a town south of Katsina, some
vigilantes are celebrating the capture and killing of a bandit leader, parading
his decapitated head through the town. There is a reason for such gruesome
displays. Being a vigilante is very dangerous. We met a vigilante also from
southern Katsina. He doesn't want to be identified for fear of retribution from
bandits in his area. He says he's one of about 30 vigilantes trying to protect a
community of around 20,000. But they have a defense pact with other local
villages. In terms of weapons, they rely on locally made guns, some a single
shot. The best they have holds six bullets. But he says that's not enough. In
the beginning, we believed that we could defeat them. But with time, we soon
realized that we were just wasting our time, because how can you, with a locally
made gun, confront somebody with an AK-47? When only 10 bandits attack and we're
able maybe to kill three or four of them, they run away. But then they come back
in force. We say 40 of them and all of them will be carrying an AK-47. And once
more, any community or village that has vigilante members, certainly that
community or village is marked for an attack. He says the police and army tend
to arrive only after the bandits have struck. So they often have to fight alone,
outnumbered and outgunned. And he's still haunted by one battle where they tried
to defend a neighboring village. They came on about 150 motorbikes, each
carrying three people. We confronted them and we exchanged fire. It was a fierce
fight. But eventually they overwhelmed us and we had to flee. We took to our
heels. Everyone was running for dear life. The bandits could ride their
motorbikes across the fields. The one driving the motorbike had his AK-47 slung
over his shoulder. The one behind standing up shooting. And if the ones shooting
don't manage to hit you, the one driving the motorbike runs you down. One of our
commanders, they shot and shot at him, but couldn't hit him. But eventually they
captured him and dragged him behind the motorbike until he died. Then they burnt
the houses. That's how they razed the village to the ground. What does your wife
and children say about you doing your job? I mean, it's a dangerous job.
Initially, they were never worried. Now they are extremely worried. Because even
if the bandits don't kill me, my family are vulnerable. They are at risk. They
can attack our wives, our children or more or less them. So we are really,
really worried now. And there is immense pressure on me to relocate from my
village. That's why we are leaving. Some say the obvious answer is to give
vigilantes better weapons and to make them into a more powerful force. And it's
become a nationwide debate, as many Nigerian politicians see vigilantes as the
solution not just to the bandit crisis, but to rising insecurity in other parts
of the country too. But there is a risk that by empowering vigilantes, you
simply create another kind of monster, especially in a country which has
witnessed ethnic conflicts and where political elites have long used local armed
groups for their own agendas. Idayat Hassan is wary. It's not a long-term
solution. Because what we have learned from each of the conflicts that have
plagued this part of the country is that the deployment of vigilante forces,
instead of reducing the conflict, actually heightens it. We saw the same in the
northeast, battling the Boko Haram insurgency and the Islamic State. We are
seeing the same actually here. The alleged extrajudicial killings have also
helped to spike this conflict. Instead she says, Nigeria's new leaders need to
create a pathway for bandits to disarm and demobilise. And they need to address
the fundamental problems which lie not just behind the bandit crisis, but behind
wider insecurity across Nigeria. When you drill down, the root causes are the
same. The land-issue challenges, the justice issues, the poverty issues, the
proliferation of harm denomination, the feeling of marginalisation, both real
and perceived, corruption. All the issues are just the absence of the state. Are
you optimistic? It will not be easy for anybody that comes in, but the person
will have to rebuild the trust with Nigerians, even if he or she does not have a
silver bullet to address the challenges immediately. Addressing those root
causes would be a huge task. It's proved beyond the capability of previous
Nigerian governments. Bello does have hope, but sitting with his family in his
small compound, he doesn't expect to be able to go home any time soon. The only
solution is having a responsive government, a responsible government that will
be fair and just to everyone. A government that will care about its citizens,
because right now, most of the citizens have lost hope in the government because
they feel it does not care about them. People here are desperate. We will do
anything to help the government to bring about lasting peace. But for now,
nothing is happening that will change the situation. This edition of Assignment
was written and presented by me, Alex Last. The producer was Abdoulaye Koura
Aboubakar. This is the BBC World Service, and on the food chain this week…
Nigerians have been feeding birds for millennia, dropping scraps for our
opportunistic feathered friends. More recently, buying food for them, spending
billions of dollars on seed mixes. So why do we do it? I'm Ruth Alexander, and
I'll be exploring what it is about the act of feeding that gives us so much
pleasure. The Food Chain, today at 11.30 and 23.30 GMT. In 50 Minutes, witness
history. With me, Anoushka Matanda-Dowdaty. Today I'm taking you back to 2006
and to the opening of a brand new art gallery. But not the kind with a cafe and
a gift shop. Stay with us. Itlik is next. This is the BBC World Service.