TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 To enter, the giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good
luck. Progress has been made. We continue to have some concerns. We will examine
the legal text, we'll look at all of this in the round and come to a decision.
We're reasonable people but we want to ensure that what the Prime Minister has
said is matched by what is actually in the agreement itself. Police in Brighton
are urging the public to check their sheds and outhouses for a baby who's been
missing since the start of the year. The child's parents, Constance Martin and
Mark Gordon, were arrested last night but the baby was not with them. Officers
believe it hasn't received any medical treatment since being born. Strike action
has begun in parts of the UK by teachers who want an above-inflation pay rise.
Members of the National Education Union are walking out in Northern England,
along with teachers in the Educational Institute of Scotland. Scientists at the
Royal Society say that the Government's target of making air travel net zero by
2050 is under threat as there is currently no single clear alternative to
traditional fuel. Campaigners believe ministers should encourage people to fly
less as there isn't enough time to rely on technology to fix climate problems
caused by aviation. China has accused the United States of overstretching the
concept of national security after the White House ordered government agencies
to wipe the Chinese social media app TikTok from federal devices within 30 days.
Beijing said the US was abusing state power. A collection of previously unknown
stories by Terry Pratchett will be published later this year after they were
discovered by fans. The tales had been written for a regional newspaper under a
pseudonym. BBC News. After the news at 11, the story of the man who played an
outsized role in events leading up to and after the invasion of Iraq in 2003 but
about whom so little is known. Ahmad Chalabi, the charismatic businessman
scorned by the CIA but feted by everyone from Bill Clinton to Dick Cheney and
who eventually became Iraq's deputy prime minister. His distant relative, the
British Iraqi journalist Selma Chalabi, takes up the story in My Cousin, Regime
Changer at 11 o'clock. But now it's time for Woman's Hour with Nuala McGovern.
Hello and welcome to Woman's Hour. Good to have your company. Well, as you were
hearing in the news bulletin, thousands of teachers are on strike this week
across England, Wales and Scotland. So we'll catch up with our BBC education
editor who's in Newcastle right now at a striker's breakfast to hear about the
state of negotiations. Now, if you're a parent affected by the strikes, we want
to hear about their impact on you today. Please text us 84844. Also today, womb,
the inside story of where it all began. Well, I learned so much reading this
book from the basics about the size and shape of the uterus, the amazing feats
that it is capable of, that is in addition to gestating a child. It is a
miraculous organ, says the midwife who wrote it, but also misunderstood. So
understanding the womb properly could potentially help with fertility issues,
avoid some miscarriages and also improve women's health all round. So that is
coming up. And best performance by a jumper in a film. Do you have a favourite?
Well, the Banshees of Innshire had some impressive knitwear on the big screen,
playing a leading role. We're going to speak to the woman who's behind the
knitting needles that created them. I want to know if you have a favourite
jumper from the silver screen. And you know what? I'll even expand it to TV
jumpers as well. So if you have a favourite from a show, do send it in. You can
text the programme again. That number is 84844. Texts will be charged at your
standard message rate. On social media, we're at BBC Women's Hour, or you can
email us through our website. And instead, if you would prefer a WhatsApp
message or a voice note to get in touch, that number is 03700 100 444. But first
to that more disruption this week that is taking place as teachers strike over
pay. Members of the National Education Union are on strike in the north and the
northwest of England, also Yorkshire and Humber, and it marks the beginning of
three consecutive days of regional action in England. Let us turn to Scotland.
The Educational Institute of Scotland and two other unions walk out again today
and tomorrow, while schools in Wales will strike on the 2nd of March. So all in
quick succession. Let's get the latest on the strike action. I am joined by the
BBC's education editor, Branwyn Jeffries, currently attending an NEU, National
Education Union, strikers breakfast in the city of Newcastle. Good to have you
with us, Branwyn. Tell us a little bit about what is happening where you are.
Forgive me, Branwyn, I think the line might be going in a little. Teachers are
beginning to arrive from their picket lines around Newcastle as they start to
gather for the rally happening later today. But they will be joined by
colleagues coming from as far afield as Cumbria and across the whole of the
north of the Borders area as well, as they come together to march on their pay
dispute about the 5% pay offer that has been made this year in England to most
teachers. So with that, and the people that are around you, Branwyn, tell us a
little about what they're telling you, why they are striking specifically. Well,
one very big issue, although pay is the key one that they are on, is when you
talk to teachers, it's about the work life balance. It's the work. Branwyn, I'm
so sorry to do this, but I'm afraid that the line is just breaking up a little
bit too much for our listeners to be able to hear what you're saying that well.
So what I'd like to do is that we will try and reconnect with you instead and be
able to hear a little bit more about the striking teachers. I'm sorry about
that. I apologise to our listeners, but we will try and reconnect with Branwyn.
But what I am going to move on to instead is something that I'm wearing,
something that my guest opposite me is also wearing, because as award seasons
continue, we want to know who should win best performance by a jumper. Could it
be Mark Darcy's reindeer jumper? Could it be Cameron Diaz's knitwear in the
holiday? What, I mean, what one kind of comes to mind as you think about it? It
is the knitwear from the Oscar nominated film, The Banshees of Innocerene, that
appears to be the jumpers of the moment. The moment they have been lusted after
in Vanity Fair, GQ, also Vogue. Brendan Gleeson, he's up for an Oscar for his
role in the film, loved the jumpers so much that he asked for two to be made for
him to keep. They were the creation of 83 year old Delia Barry, who knitted them
all by hand with only photographs to serve as her instructions. And Delia is
going to join us on the line in just a moment. I see a comment already coming in
from our listeners. My favourite TV jumper is Alison from Ghosts on BBC. We
often comment on her stylish jumper collection, Ghosts superfan Catherine
getting in touch there. But let me start with Delia. Delia, these jumpers are so
beautiful. For people who haven't seen them, I was actually distracted by them
as I saw them on the screen. What did you think when you saw them? When I saw
them on the screen, I thought they looked good. When I was knitting them, it was
a different story. How come? Well, you're concentrating so much. So you're not
really taking any notice until you see the finished product on somebody. And
seeing that finished product, how should we describe them to our listeners? I
mean, some of the colours, perhaps you'd like to tell us about them. Tell our
listeners about that, Delia, or what you were trying to achieve with those
patterns. Well, it's back around the 1920s style. They were old forest grass,
fishermen wore them. They're not really Arden jumpers. They're more fishermen.
Barry Coggins is a fisherman rib with a contrast colour. And Colin Farrell's
one, the red one, is, I don't know how you describe the pattern, but it has a
pointed collar, which caught a lot of interest. And then Colin Farrell's navy,
kind of a blue one. That stitch is just quite simple stitch. But looks
fantastic. I have to say, when I was looking at some of the colours, they just
brought this film to life. The colours, yes. I had somebody who was watching
that film that actually says they found it difficult to know which period it was
in at first, because those fashions are so much back at the moment and something
that is very much sought after and something that has touched a nerve with our
listeners. I see so many people that are getting in touch about the jumpers that
has really hit a chord with them. I see also opposite me is fashion and beauty
editor Naomi Pike in a pink jumper, I should tell our listeners. And Naomi has
written for Vogue about iconic knitwear in films. I saw you nodding along as
Delia was describing those jumpers. Yeah, they're so beautiful. And I think that
story that they have been handmade kind of really transcends through to the
cinema and obviously is a very, very important part of the film. And obviously
it's touching people watching the film in a way that maybe costumes don't always
have that effect. I think it's that tactility. We all kind of understand how a
jumper feels, what it can mean, especially the emotional touch that if it's a
hand-knitted jumper like the one I'm wearing, my mum made. Your mum made it,
it's lovely. How would you describe it? It's got a classic crew neck, but it's
quite a vibrant fuchsia colour. And it looks very warm and very cosy, I should
say as well. Delia, when did you get into knitting? I started knitting when I
was about seven. When I started school, our teacher was very involved with
knitting and sewing. So 76 years ago. 76 years, a lifetime ago. I've been
knitting on enough. I had interest in it. And it's always a challenge, a new
pattern. And with these as well, as I understand it. Did I hear this correct,
that they kind of gave you a print out of black and white, like a photocopy of a
pattern? A black and white photograph of someone wearing a jumper. And then you
had to interpret. Yes, I used magnifying glass and knitted little squares and
ripped them back until I got it right. And get it right you did. How long have
you been working on knitwear for films? Well, I did Dancing at Luna, that's way
back. I just knitted the gloves and cardigan. And then there was Rain and Fire
was the next one. I'm not sure when that came out. And then Little Women, which
was for television. I have to. And after that, I suppose about 10 years. About
10 years. On and off. Okay. I love this, we'd say later life career change as
well that you've had Delia. Very inspiring. I want to read some of the messages
that are coming in to us here. Now, let me see. Sarah Lund in The Killing, that
cute little Scandi jumper, excuse me, gave her a deceptively innocent look,
while she displayed fabulous strength and sass as a cop. That's from Jackie.
Colourful mohair jumpers in the TV series I May Destroy You. Let me see. Not a
single jumper, but love actually deserves an honourable mention for the sheer
amount of turtleneck knitwear throughout the film. Delia's chuckling at that
one. Good morning, Woman's Hour. The best jumper in a TV show by a country mile
is Mrs Doyle's creation, lovingly made for Daniel O'Donnell. So special that it
was presented baked in a cake. Couple of people with this one. Delia, do you
remember Starsky and Hutch? Yes. Yes. Well, Starsky's jumper in that. Everyone
wanted one, says Paul. Joel in London feeling the same way. I mean, when we
speak of best performance by a jumper, Naomi, you've heard some of my listeners'
thoughts. What are yours? I immediately think of Nicholas Hoult in A Single Man,
the film that was Tom Ford, obviously the brilliant American fashion designer's
directorial debut. So while I think great costumes are anticipated, perhaps we
thought they would be more aligned to kind of his fashion legacy. But here, when
I think about it, I think of this cream, super fluffy moha maybe. Just kind of
feminine jumper. Yeah, I suppose. Yeah. He was a young homosexual man and was
kind of a bit of the heartthrob in the movie. But I think still it had a
sensitivity to it. Yeah. So that is one. I know, Delia, you do wear knitwear as
well from some of the little videos I was watching. Do you have a favourite
style of jumper? Well, my favourite one now at the moment is an Aran cardigan I
knitted last year, which is very warm and cosy. So that's... And it's got a
fleck. It's not just a plain colour. It's got multi-colour flecks in it. So how
long does it take you to knit a jumper, whether like that one or one that, for
example, Brendan Gleeson was wearing in the Banshees of InnoSheeran? That one, I
can tell you, took me a week. A week? Because I was on a time limit. So you can
just knock it out? Oh, yes, you have to put the hours in. Naomi is pretty
impressed, I think. Go ahead. Absolutely. No, I think I've really grown up
watching knitwear being made, because as I said, my mum is a real avid knitter
and I know kind of the time and the love. And also knitting is very technical
and it really often involves a lot of maths, something that my brain doesn't
have to have capacity for, but I'm forever inspired by those that can do it.
Yes, you can. And I think that's why they become so special, because there's the
time and the effort and that it's been done by hands and two sticks. You know,
it's amazing. Lots more coming in. It's good for the brain. Go ahead, Delia. It
is good for the brain. Talk us through that. It is good for the brain. It keeps
the brain very active. Because if you're watching Kelly and knitting, you're
actually counting in your head at the same time. So it makes the brain work. I
was watching an interview you were doing and you were knitting while doing it. I
don't hear anything in the background. You're not doing it now, are you? I'm not
doing it now. No, no. I'm just being lazy at the moment. I don't think we'll
ever put that word to you, Delia, to be quite honest, considering how prolific
you've been with the knitwear. And you got a credit, I understand, on the movie,
but you didn't stick around to see the end of it. No, because I didn't know it
was on it. I didn't know, actually, until the following day when one of the
girls in the studios rang me and asked me what I thought about the credits. I
said I didn't see it. So she sent me, she sent it to me online. Good stuff.
Well, it's lovely speaking to you, 83-year-old Delia Bowery. Now you'll know her
work if you watch The Banshees of Innishirn or indeed many other movies as well.
And we've also had Naomi Pike, who has written for Vogue about iconic knitwear
and films, something that lots of you are getting in touch on, on 84844. Now, I
want to jump back to teachers. I'm sorry about that line we had for our BBC
education editor, Branwen Jeffries. She is currently attending National
Education Union Strikers Breakfast in Newcastle. Sorry, Branwen, let us return.
What are people telling you about why they are striking where you are? Well,
Nuala, I think one placard I've seen just come into this gathering at the
breakfast before they have a rally today says it all. It was a teacher carrying
a massive green straw with the placard saying the final straw on it. Many of the
teachers here told me it's a last resort for them to go on strike. They're very
well aware of the impact on children. In fact, some of them have brought their
children here today because their own schools are shut. The key issue officially
in the dispute is the 5% pay offer for most teachers. But behind that sits a
very pressing issue for most teachers, which is that they feel that their
workload is increasingly hard to manage. That although people have this
perception that they have very contained hours and long holidays, the reality
that they are living is taking work home every evening and working typically a
couple of hours on Saturday and Sunday, too, just to keep on top of the
paperwork. And how would that workload be negotiated? It's kind of a bit more
clear cut when we're talking about a percentage of pay. It is indeed. I mean, it
has been part of the conversations I know, certainly in England, because bear in
mind, although we are seeing teachers taking industrial action across the UK, as
you outlined in various different ways, the negotiations are separate. In
England, workload, what is actually needed for teachers to gather in terms of
data that is very useful in terms of looking at how pupils are doing through
schools, that is part of the informal discussions that have happened so far. But
we are now in a position where there is a total standoff. So the Secretary of
State for Education in England, Gillian Keegan, has said that she's very willing
to meet the unions and to negotiate, but she will not meet them further unless
the remaining strikes are called off. The National Education Union has said,
with the backing of the other three unions in the dispute, that it is going to
continue with its strike action, because so far the government hasn't said what
it is prepared to negotiate, or if it would be prepared to revisit that 5% pay
offer. It's worth noting in Scotland, there are a number of it's worth noting in
Scotland, an offer of a revised offer of 6% was rejected. In Wales, an
additional 1.5% was offered with a one off 1.5% payment that was also rejected.
So there's not much prospect if you're listening to this as a parent, or as an
employer who needs people to be able to come to work, that this strike is going
to be resolved anytime soon. So we mentioned some of them that are taking place
this week across England, and also Wales and Scotland. What are parents telling
you? I think there is a mixture of exasperation and resignation. Certainly for
parents, it is extremely difficult to manage if they're needing to get to work.
Not everybody has family just down the road. Those that do are calling on
grandparents to come and look after their children. Most primary schools have
seen, it's been a much more patchy impact across primary schools. Looking at the
letters that have gone out to parents in the last week about today's strike
actually across the north of England, quite a number I've seen have said that
they're going to prioritise the younger year groups, because they recognise that
those are the children that are maybe harder to leave with, with older
relatives, and that it's more crucial for parents who need to get to work. But
of course, parents have lived through with their children, huge disruption of
COVID, in which their children miss a large amount of school. If parents begin
to feel that their children's education is going to suffer, that their
preparation for GCSEs, their preparation at the end of primary for moving out,
big move up to high school is going to be affected, then their patience may wear
thin. Coming back to the government, again, the economy was doing slightly
better than was expected. I mean, does that put any pressure on them to try and
resolve these disputes, perhaps in a way that it wasn't previously? Well, of
course, what's different about this teacher strike compared to the last really
big action we saw in 2016, is it's happening alongside disputes across the
public sector. So we're seeing the nurses, paramedics, now junior doctors have
announced industrial action. And that makes the negotiations more complex and
more tightly controlled from the centre of government, from Downing Street and
the Treasury, who are arguing that in order to begin to see some slowing down in
that rate of inflation, the rising cost of living that people are seeing in
their energy bills, their food bills, just everything that you have to pay for,
for your family. That in order to slow down that rate of inflation, they have to
keep restraints in public pay. Now, the unions dispute that, and the NEU points
to the fact that certainly if you look at secondary schools, when you look at
how many people we're recruiting into initial teacher training, so signing up to
become our teachers of the future, we've only got 60% of the numbers that we
need signing up this year. And it's absolutely critical in subjects like
chemistry, like physics, where graduates have many, many other options. Now, I
think a wider question is how does that fit with the Prime Minister's aspiration
for us to be a science-focused economy, where we have good math skills? He's
talking about boosting math skills for 16 to 18. You have to have the teachers
in play. So there are bigger problems that lie behind it, that whatever the pay
dispute ends up landing on will also have to be resolved to make teaching an
attractive profession to go into, an attractive profession to stay in. Bronwyn
Jeffries, thanks so much. We are asking you to get in touch 84844. Fiona got in
touch saying through all these teacher strikes, it is the children that seem to
be forgotten. My daughter is in her last year of school, been through COVID at a
crucial age, and she's in her last year of school, been through COVID at a
crucial time in her education. By the end of next week, she would have missed 12
more days of school due to strike action. These are a lost generation. No one
seems to care. Instead, Errol getting in touch says I'm so frustrated by Woman's
Hour and other media outlets focusing on the impact of teachers on parents,
teacher strike on parents. The more important strike issue is what schools will
do if they don't get the funding needed for teachers, teaching assistants and
even pens and books. Keep your comments coming on that or indeed on the best
performance by a jumper. Let's turn to donor conception. There's been a lot of
conversations about it this year. A law created in 2005 that allows donor
conceived children to find out more information about their donor parents once
they reach the age of 18 came into effect in January. Maybe you heard the
conversation on this programme. But today a new consultation is opening that
will give people the chance to have their say in possible new laws surrounding
fertility treatment and also research into human embryos. Now, one proposal that
I was reading about this morning is that donors could be identifiable to
children born of donor conception before they turn 18. Now, the consultation is
being held by the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority. It's known as
the HFEA. They want to update and improve the laws around fertility treatments
in the UK. With me is Julia Chain, who is chair of the HFEA. Good morning.
Welcome. Good morning. Thank you. So, the laws that are there that govern the
HFEA are 30 years old. Why haven't they been updated before this? Well, as you
said, the fertility law is over 30 years old. And while it stood the test of
time remarkably well, medicine, science, attitudes, the society have moved on.
And really, as you mentioned, parts of it are now updated and frankly, not fit
for purpose. The law was actually updated in 2008, following technological
advances and again, changes in advances in medicine and science. But that was 15
years ago. And really, it's time to change it again. Let's talk about that one
that got people chatting. I was looking at online a proposal to egg or sperm
donor details potentially to be available to under 18s. Why is that on the table
now? Well, as you mentioned, the law in 2005 changed so that children born of
donation after that time could, when they reach the 18, find out identifying
information from us, from the HFEA, about their genetic heritage. And actually,
interestingly, the first cohort of those children turn 18 this year. But with
the rise in ancestry websites and DNA kits, you know, at the press of a button,
you can find out quite a lot of information about your genetic heritage. There
is potential for donors and recipients and donor conceived children to be
contacted without the support directly, without the support of the HFEA or not
in accordance with the law. So we felt that perhaps now is the time to start a
conversation with society to ask for people's views about whether the current
expectations in the law are realistic. And for example, as you mentioned,
changes might be that rather than waiting until the child is 18, identifying
information might be available either to donors or to the parents of that child
when the child is born, for example. That's one of the issues that is a possible
change in the law. And I suppose the big question there would be, when is that
decided? Is it when people go for treatment, the sort of donor that you choose
that has given up the right to anonymity until the child reaches 18? Exactly.
All these things need to be discussed. And that's one of the reasons we're
launching the consultation today. We'd like to hear from professional sector
experts, but also from the patients themselves, from your listeners. We want to
hear what their views are and share their experiences of a whole range of issues
in the act that they feel might need to be changed. Like what if somebody and
how do they do that? Right. So firstly, they do it by responding to the
consultation, which is on our website. It's I think, very lay friendly. We
worked hard to make sure it's very lay friendly. And also, it's important to
note that you can answer the questions which are just relevant to you or which
you're interested in. You don't have to answer the whole thing. But in general,
we'd like to see greater flexibility in the act so that we can continue to
regulate in the best possible way for patients. And there are a number of areas
where we can do this. I'd like to give you a good example. For example, is
patient care. It's interesting in the 1991 Act, the HFE Act, it talks a lot
about protecting the embryo, but it's really rather silent on protecting the
patient. We'd like to put the patient care at the centre of a revised act. We'd
like to see it as an explicit principle of the act. And that would allow us to
take proportionate action where, for example, patient safety is involved. So
give me a concrete example. Well, for example, I'm not saying for one moment
that there are safety issues. IVF is a very safe treatment. But from time to
time, breaches of licences do occur. And when they occur, the only powers we've
got at the moment are suspend or to revocate a licence, effectively closing a
clinic, which could have really negative implications for women in the middle of
treatment. So we'd like broader and more proportionate powers where not only
could we suspend all or part of a service, but for example, we could impose
financial penalties where there's been serious non-compliance. The changes will
have to go through Parliament. And it's six weeks, right? This consultation is
open just for relations. Yes, till the middle of April. If they want to add
their stories or their questions to that consultation. But the changes will have
to go through Parliament. It's such a thorny area because so many ethical
questions always come up. Are you expecting your suggestions to pass or
expecting pushback? Well, the way it works is that we will at the end of the
consultation, analyse all the answers. And again, I really hope as many people
as possible respond to the consultation. We will then make recommendations to
the Department of Health and Social Care. And we will work with them and
government to try to ensure that we, you know, the Act is updated. And as you
say, it is a matter for Parliament, but it's passed. And I think that there is
cross-party will to make changes because after all, we're talking about an Act
that regulates medicine and science that's 30 years old and medicine and science
has moved on so considerably that really it's worth doing. Juliet, did you ever
think, I don't know, over the years, if you're interested, when you've been
interested in this particular topic, that we'd be where we are now when it comes
to human fertilisation and embryology? No, if you think about the advances that
have been made since the first, Louise Brown was born, the first test tube baby,
it's extraordinary. You might be interested, this month is the 100th anniversary
of what they call the Daedalus Lecture, which was a lecture given by J.B.S.
Haldane, who is one of the fathers of modern science. And in it, a hundred years
ago this month, he posited the idea that IVF could happen, there would be
conception outside the womb. A hundred years on, here we are, and science and
medicine is moving forward at such a rate. And I really hope that infertility in
the next 30 years is something really of the past. My goodness. But we need an
Act to help us regulate it. What a concept. Julia Chain, thanks so much. Thank
you so much. Lots of you getting in touch. Let me see, I'm looking after my
grandchildren today. I've had to cancel plans, but I'm happy to do a bit to
support the teachers because ultimately our children will be the beneficiaries
of a better paid profession. That one, of course, on the teacher strikes.
Jumpers. The jumper worn by Fred Astaire in the 1968 film Finian's Rainbow was
designed and knitted by Cyril Cullen of Farney Castle in County Tipperary. So
says Eamon, who I have a feeling might be Irish as well. Right. I want to move
on now to Ukraine. Last week, we marked the one year anniversary since Russia
invaded Ukraine. Last night, you might have seen Ukraine's President Zelensky
said the eastern front line of the battle is becoming more and more difficult
with a renewed Russian onslaught. On Women's Hour, we continue to talk about the
devastating impact that this war is having on women and not only to those who've
had to leave loved ones behind in order to get their family to safety, but also
to those women who decided to stay and then became victims of that war and not
always victims of military weapons, but of sexual violence as well. The current
number of conflict related sexual violence cases that has been formally
identified in Ukraine is 154, but officials expect the real number to be
significantly higher. Some progress has been made. The establishment of a
special sexual violence war crimes department within Ukraine's general
prosecutor's office. It's solely dedicated to investigating allegations of
crimes of sexual violence that have happened since that invasion. I want to
bring in both my guests, Anna Mikulenko, a human rights lawyer, senior legal
advisor for global rights compliance who works in Ukraine. Also, Anna Oral from
the Andreev Foundation. They have partnered with Women for Women International,
which helps victims of sexual violence as a result of that Russian invasion.
You're both so welcome to us. Let me start with you, Anna Mikulenko. On the
legal side of this, there is some progress. There is that establishment of the
war crimes department. But how helpful is that in a day to day basis with what
women are dealing with? Anna Mikulenko Hi, good morning. Well, it's not
immediately obvious, but it is indeed pretty helpful because it's not just a
formal structure that was created suddenly within the war crimes unit. It's more
something that symbolizes the change of mindset within the law enforcement and
within the prosecutorial system. So that unit not just oversees the
investigation, they also have field missions. They directly interact with the
survivors of sexual violence. They are the ones often who are first to identify
such survivors. And therefore, they're the ones who can and who are doing the
best to provide victim and witness support, protection to the extent possible,
and generally support beyond the criminal justice system limits. So it's the
same union that is in touch with the survivors on a daily basis to find out,
say, someone needs new glasses and someone needs a new phone and someone needs
the windows that were shattered in their house to be replaced. So that is not
prosecutorial job per se, but it's something that the unit is also helping with.
I understand. Anna Orel, I mentioned you're working with victims of sexual
violence. What do they tell you? Anna Orel Good morning. Thank you for
invitation. People who survived such horrible things as sexual violence, they
have no desire to live on, and they found themselves in crisis situations. They
often have no job. Sometimes they lost their beloved, they lost their husbands
at the front line, their friends, and they felt lost and hopelessness. And our
main goal is to give them the reason to live on and to give them confidence in
their efforts. And we need to explain to them, to support that they can live on
and they can resist. It's very important. So different stories, you know, they
are awful. Yes, in most cases, people don't want to live on. And I can imagine
if they're in that state of mind, I'm wondering, Anna Orel, do they have the
inclination to try and prosecute, you know, bring those forward, those crimes
that have been done to them? Anna Orel At this date, psychologists work with 40
victims of sexual violence and don't want to talk about what happened with them.
And they really scare. And some of them, even don't want to apply to
prosecutors, to police. They're afraid. They are under pressure, you know, that
Russians, they can return, they can occupy again some cities and people are
really afraid. So we need to do many efforts and to work hard to support these
people and, you know, to help them to talk about what happened with them and to
apply to a prosecutor's bodies. Shona Robinson Anna, Mikenko, let me turn back
to you. You hear that so many women, that they're so devastated that they don't
want to think about it or talk about it with anyone, much less go the route of
having it prosecuted. So what can be done? There must be so many cases that are
like that. Anna Orel Indeed. Well, it's the work of the prosecution at the
moment. It's not just about the achieving justice or actual prosecutions. It's
even to identify witnesses and victims and to see what kind of assistance can be
provided before they formalize their relationship, so to say, with the
prosecution. So before the formal investigation starts. And of course, the more
of that is done, the more likely these witnesses come forward and testify or
submit their statements. And the more that builds awareness in communities that
prosecution and investigators are there to help, not to stigmatize the
survivors, not to just collect their statements and forget about it, but to help
as much as possible with or within the criminal justice mechanisms. Has there
been any successful prosecutions? Anna Orel Depends on what you call a
successful prosecution, but a few cases were submitted to courts in absentia. I
think we have three judgments as of now. So three in the past 12 months. So if
they are in absentia, that would be that the perpetrator is not there in the
trial. What does that achieve? That's a tricky question because apart from the
recognition of the crime, which is very important in itself, for some victims,
it's really important, according to them, that the perpetrators are named and
the responsibility is placed on them. And that helps the survivors then to move
on. And of course, that also helps in some cases. So it might help to arrest
these people if they ever leave Russia, which I believe is very unlikely. But
still, it's more of a truth seeking at the moment. And the trials in absentia.
And I'm also wondering, because this is taking place, as I mentioned, within the
Ukraine General Prosecutor's Office, the War Crimes Department or Sexual
Violence War Crimes Department. I mean, is there any moves to try and stop these
incidences to begin with? Any safeguards for those women that could potentially
be in that dangerous situation? Well, there is a hotline and a few leaflets that
can be accessed online. But it's not really up to Ukrainian prosecutors to stop
the incidents that occur more often than not in the occupied territories or in
the so-called grey areas where the hostilities are ongoing. Most crimes that we
saw up until now are in the occupied territories where Ukrainian governments do
not have access to. And it only becomes known when these territories are
liberated or very rarely when victims are able to make phone calls to a hotline
or to a prosecution general office to let someone know that a crime was
committed. Anna Megerenko, a human rights lawyer, senior legal advisor for
global rights compliance, and also Anna Orel, who works for the Andreev
Foundation and helps victims of sexual violence as a result of the Russian
invasion. Thanks to you both. Now, you've probably heard some of the tributes to
Betty Boothroyd, the first and so far only female Speaker of the House of
Commons, whose death was announced yesterday. She was 93. A former Labour MP,
she served as Speaker from 1992 to 2000, before going on to become a Baroness in
the House of Lords from 2001. Baroness Boothroyd was on this programme many
times. Let me bring you a little from an interview she did with Jenny Murray in
2001. The interview opens with a clip from 1987, when Betty was appointed Deputy
Speaker. The first person you'll hear is Peter Pyke, Labour MP for Burnley. Glad
to see you in the chair. Do we call you Madam Deputy Speaker? Please call me
that. Madam. Thank you very much. It's the first time I've seen you in the chair
and I'm glad to welcome you to the chair. Betty Boothroyd, had you prepared that
line or did it come off the cuff? Hello. It came off the cuff to a large extent,
Jenny, but I had given some thought to that I wanted to be called Madam really,
because what had happened is there had been a Deputy Speaker some years before
me and for something like a year while she was Deputy Speaker, she was referred
to as Mr Deputy Speaker and recorded in Hansard as Mr Deputy Speaker. I thought
that was very peculiar and I just wanted to assert myself and make it known that
I was on the female agenda, so why not call me Madam. It did set a tone of a
degree of theatricality to your tenure. How important is drama and performance
to the presidium? Well, I think there's a relationship between the two. We must
always give of our best whatever we do. You do it every day. I listen to you.
I'm a regular listener and you always perform to the best of your ability and
you're a performer. In the same way as everybody in public life must do that. So
I think there is a relationship there. And here is Betty Boothroyd at her
theatrical best, encouraging Simon Hughes MP to talk. Order! There is no point
in waiting for silence. The Honourable Gentleman is going to get silence.
Produce your voice, Mr Hughes. Produce your voice. Good advice to us all. You're
using your voice by texting. Let me go back to knitting jumpers. Daily Browrie
talked about the maths in knitting. 40 years ago when computers were introduced
into the school where I taught, my friend and I went along to learn how to do
programming. We were the only female teachers who went, a maths and economics
teacher. We wrote a programme to work out average scores of our pupils' marks.
Much to everyone's surprise, our programme worked first time. How did you do
that? They asked. Our reply, programming is just like a knitting pattern, so
says Kate Izzard. Joe got in touch. The knitwear in the show Narcos is amazing.
But I have to give a shout out to the Hero Boys jumper and the sock which
contains the mouse in the recent Witches film. Also the knitwear in the new
Wonka film is going to be amazing and I know because myself and my friend
knitted it. Who are you Joe? I want to know. I love Wonka. Lots more coming in.
84844. On that or indeed the teacher strikes do get in touch. But now I want to
turn to something that is the shape of a pear. With the power to create life or
indeed death in certain circumstances. What can I be talking about? I'm talking
about the womb, an organ, a muscle, miraculous, misunderstood. Let us talk about
it. The book is Womb, the inside story of where we all began. It is by Leah
Hazard, a practising NHS midwife. And within this book, Leah looks to explore
the womb, an organ that she says is woefully under research. You're very welcome
to Woman's Hour. Thank you so much. It's a pleasure to be here. A clenched fist.
Why do you use that image to describe the womb? Well, I think it's a really
powerful image and it's apt because it's an incredibly powerful organ. You know,
this is the only organ in our body that has the power to create a new organ
within itself, the placenta, and also a new life. And it has to have the
capability to expand to many times its original size and then to contract. And
yes, unfortunately, sometimes it can bring death as well as life. So I think the
clenched fist really is apt. Yeah, I think it's very appropriate for what this
organ can do. Is this about the size of a clenched fist when not pregnant? Yes,
it is roughly the size of a kind of small clenched fist. It's more the shape of
a kind of upside down pear and it just sits nestled neatly within your pelvis.
And then if a person does become pregnant, it can obviously, as we all know,
expand many, many times to accommodate a fully grown human fetus. Uterus and
womb. You prefer the word womb? I actually prefer the word uterus, to be honest.
I think, you know, I use the word womb and the book is called womb because I
think it's a term that people are more comfortable with. But I'm all in favour
of abandoning kind of fluffy terms and euphemisms and calling it what it is.
But, you know, to each their own, it means the same thing. So it's fine. You are
a practising midwife. What was the biggest surprise about the uterus when you
started training? When I started training? Well, I mean, you know, every time
you're witnessing a labour or a birth or a loss or, you know, any event during
pregnancy or the postnatal period, you're witnessing something that's
unpredictable and always surprising and sometimes disappointing and frustrating.
I think possibly the thing that's been most surprising to me is how, in spite of
all our attempts to manage the uterus and what it does and how it behaves, it's
still incredibly misunderstood and unpredictable. Birth is always a surprise.
Any woman or person with a womb going through their gynaecological life will
cope with all kinds of surprises, pain, bleeding, loss, joy, infertility,
menopause, sometimes transition, gender changes. And, you know, it's just an
endlessly surprising organ. One thing that surprised me when I was reading your
book is that when a female baby is born, sometimes their nappy can be streaked
with a little blood. Yeah, absolutely true. And this is a completely normal
physiological event for which most parents are completely unprepared. And what
happens is when that little female baby is inside its mother, it absorbs some of
that mother's sex hormones just from being in that environment. Then when the
little girl is born, she goes through basically what's a withdrawal bleed. So
it's almost like a mini period, except obviously she hasn't released an egg, she
hasn't ovulated. So when I was working in the postnatal wards, quite often
parents would approach me in a state of panic because they could see a little
bit of blood in their child's nappy and they would say, you know, what is this
and be really distressed. But it's a normal physiological event for female
infants. And this is a theme that runs through the whole book. You know, the
uterus does all kinds of amazing and also very mundane, normal physiological
things for which we are entirely unprepared. What about, this was a new term for
me as well, menstrual effluent. So I'm not saying menstrual blood there because
it's not all blood as I learned. No, it isn't. And this was a surprise to me. I
mean, you've asked me what's surprising. I have to say, even though I kind of
thought of myself as a bit of an expert, probably 80% of what I found in the
book was a surprise to me. And on the subject of menstrual effluent, I was
speaking to a really fascinating researcher in America who's doing great work on
endometriosis and its causes. And she and many of her colleagues use the term
menstrual effluent rather than blood because what comes out during a period
isn't just red blood cells. It's other kinds of tissue, it's mucous membrane,
it's immune cells. And each person's menstrual effluent, which just means a
substance that literally flows out, has its own unique biochemical fingerprint.
And if we can better understand and analyze that fingerprint, that may in turn
lead to better, less interventionist ways of diagnosing things like
endometriosis, possibly uterine cancer, and really could completely
revolutionize healthcare. But people have not been studying the lining of the
womb that comes each month. And I was reading that they thought there'd be too
much of a yuck factor about women handing it over, for example, as a specimen.
But they were proven wrong. They were absolutely proven, conclusively wrong. So
this again was this Dr. Christine Metz in America, who is running a trial called
the ROSE trial. It's about trying to diagnose endometriosis by analyzing
menstrual blood. And when she went to funding bodies to try and get some money,
some grant money to do this work, she basically was met with the yuck factor, as
she calls it, which the predominantly male funders just thought, this is
disgusting. Not only do we not really want to fund this, but women won't
actually want to collect their own menstrual flow and send it to you because
they'll be yucked out as well. And what Dr. Metz found is that nothing could be
further from the truth. Women actually were desperately keen to contribute to
this research, to collect their own menstrual flood with special cups or pads to
send it in for analysis. They filled out reams of paperwork to be able to take
part in the study as well. So the enthusiasm is there. We want to understand our
bodies. So the people that hold the purse strings for this research really need
to sort of embrace that enthusiasm as well. Fascinating as well that there could
even perhaps be a smart tampon that could pick up on what's inside us or what we
should be thinking about. Yeah, not only could there be a smart tampon, there is
a smart tampon. So this technology I found is being developed again in America
and essentially it would analyze certain sort of biochemical factors in your
menstrual blood that's collected by the tampon and then send that information to
an app on your phone which then could potentially collect and analyze that data
and send it to your health care provider. Now when we think about the fact that
women and people with wombs go through really incredibly painful and difficult
diagnostic procedures like hysteroscopy and things like that, just to be able to
get this information from a tampon is phenomenal and that could become a
reality. And of course there's privacy questions which we could get into. It
could be a whole other discussion about some of those more futuristic aspects.
But I want to go back to basics perhaps, back to babies. The uterus is often
seen as a backdrop to conception but your research and the people you're
speaking to says it could play an active role in conception. Peristalsis is
that, we often think about that as kind of a swallowing motion or a motion that
goes down through your intestines, but you're thinking about it when it comes to
the uterus. Yes, so this was hugely surprising to me because I was raised, as
most of us were, with this idea that when it comes to conception the sperm plays
this very active heroic masculine questing role and sort of like finds its way
to the egg which is just this passive thing and the womb doesn't even get a look
in. But actually a Spanish scientist I spoke to is studying these tiny little
wave-like motions that happen within the lining of the womb during orgasm
actually. And what she found is that during orgasm and also just during sort of
everyday life there is a peristaltic motion that helps to suck the sperm into
the womb. So actually the uterus is playing a really active role and some other
research that I was looking at shows that in the cervix, in the neck of the
womb, there are also these little pockets or crypts. Oh this is fascinating.
Yeah, I mean just amazing. These little crypts can potentially hold sperm there
until it's the optimal time for them to be released further up the uterus to
fertilise the egg. A couple of days I'm thinking. Yeah, I mean I think the
window is still sort of precisely to be determined but yeah, not more than a few
days. So the uterus... I was just thinking of some surprises if it was longer
than that. Yeah, other species can actually hold and sort of maintain sperm in
the crypts for potentially months at a time which was absolutely mind-blowing to
me. But yeah, humans not more than a few days. But the point really that I found
fascinating is that the uterus is definitely not just passive when it comes to
sex and conception. Some of the words hostile or irritable uterus, incompetent
cervix. Yeah, I'm sure many of your listeners will have heard these epithets or
you know, unfortunately been on the receiving end of them. Because as women and
people with wombs, when we go through our gynaecological lives, you know, things
happen that aren't always favourable or desirable. And you know, a lot of medics
throw around these terms like, oh, you've got a hostile uterus, that's why you
can't conceive. Or your labour took so long because your contractions were
ineffective, you failed to progress and these kinds of things. Or you've got an
incompetent cervix which opened too soon, that's why you lost your baby. And
yes, although these terms are all trying to describe things that have happened,
you know, there's no other field of medicine where we would tolerate such
negative, kind of personalised language about physiological events. So there's a
part in my book where I really kind of rail against that. And I hope that this
kind of language becomes a thing of the past. I also like the term gentle
cesarean. Yeah, so that was another thing I was looking at. And you know,
obviously, as a midwife, I had to include a lot about pregnancy and birth in the
book. That's where I kind of personally geek out. And there's a lot of debate,
rightly so nowadays, about the rising rates of cesarean sections. And I spoke to
a surgeon who's using what's called the gentle cesarean technique. Now, this is
not for an emergency scenario. This is well planned. Yes, well planned. And
there's time to be taken. And the baby can be delivered in such a way that it
emerges more sort of slowly or spontaneously, if you will, from the abdomen. And
there's skin to skin, ECG leads are kept a little bit out of the way. And it's
just about minimising the presence of all these necessary medical sort of items
and procedures, just so the ambience and the process seems a bit more person-
centred and individualised. In our last 20 seconds, what was the most surprising
thing about the womb? The most surprising thing about the womb is how much we
don't know, actually. Because I spent the better part of the last three years
looking into it. I've included what I could in the book. And the more I realised
I knew, the more I realised I didn't know. So hopefully the book will start some
conversations about those mysteries. It's so interesting. The book is called
Womb. I loved reading it. The inside story of where we all began. And my guest
has been Lea Hazard, a practising NHS midwife. Well, tomorrow I will be speaking
to the actor, singer, songwriter and all round South London superstar, Cynthia
Erivo, about her role in the upcoming film, Luther, The Fallen Son. I do hope
you'll join me. Woman's Hour was presented by Nuala McGovern and produced by
Lucinda Montefiore. The studio engineer was Gail Gordon. Now, it's Tuesday, so
it's call you in yours this lunchtime. Winifred Robinson is here with the
details. Hello, Winifred. Hello, Viji. Thank you. Yes, we want to know how
rising energy prices are affecting you this winter. What changes have you made
to be able to afford your bills? Are you on a prepayment meter? How's that
working out? Give us a call. Ring 03 700 100 444. People are trying to use less
electricity and gas. Have you been doing that? Not everyone can. Perhaps you're
a student or you have a young family and you're renting somewhere that's hard to
heat. We'd like to hear from you. Have you fallen behind with your bills? It's
not a great time to try to get in touch with your energy supplier. Satisfaction
with customer service is pretty low. How are rising energy prices affecting you?
That's what we'd like to talk about this lunchtime. Here's that number to call
again.