TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 begins this Wednesday evening at 8.45. Amen. BBC News at 11 o'clock. Rishi
Sunak says he's giving it everything to try and get a new deal with the European
Union on post-Brexit trading rules in Northern Ireland. He told the Sandy Times
that he wanted to get the job done. The Irish Prime Minister, Leo Varadkar, said
both sides were inching towards an agreement. But our political correspondent,
Ian Watson, says there will be more hurdles to overcome. Reaching an agreement
with the EU is only part of the battle. The bigger deal, if you like, is trying
to get Northern Ireland's DUP on side. Now, effectively, they're saying they're
not going to be going to a power-sharing agreement unless they can give this
deal the thumbs up. Tonight they're urging them to take more time over that
deal. Police in Northern Ireland will be given more time to question four of the
five men arrested in connection with the shooting of an off-duty officer on
Wednesday. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell remains in a critical
condition in hospital after he was attacked outside a sports complex in Oma.
Finance ministers from the G20 Group of Major Economies have blamed differences
over the war in Ukraine for the failure of their talks in India. The host said
Russia and China had objected to parts of the proposed closing statement
condemning Moscow's aggression. Police searching for the crew of a tugboat that
overturned off Greenock in Inverclyde yesterday have recovered two bodies. They
understood to have been the only people on board when it capsized. The search
operation had involved divers, coast guard units and the R&LI. A walrus that
drew crowds when it was spotted on the south and east coasts of England appears
to have arrived in Iceland. The mammal, named Thor, appeared in Hampshire in
December before spending New Year in Scarborough and heading 70 miles further
north to Blythe in Northumberland. In cricket, England are firmly on top against
New Zealand on day three of the second test in Wellington. They have enforced
the follow-on after the Kiwis were dismissed for 209, trailing by 226 runs. A
few moments ago, New Zealand were four for none. BBC News This year, as part of
Red Nose Day, you could win an iconic BBC treasure. How about Pat Butch's
earrings from his tenders? Heavier than you might think? Maybe a House of Games
winner's suitcase? Or Craig Revelhorewood's 10 score paddle from Strictly? Not
that he uses it much. These are just some of the BBC items that could be yours
as part of Red Nose Day. Hey, not the microphone! To enter, find out more or
donate to Comic Relief, go to bbc.co.uk forward slash Red Nose Day. We'll find
the terms and conditions and privacy notice. You must be 18 or over to enter.
The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. In half
an hour and ready for the poet laureate, Simon Armitage shares his shed with the
award-winning composer, conductor and music producer Simon Dobson. Who would
probably score quite well on this. Counterpoint, the general knowledge music
quiz, chaired by Paul Gambaccini. Hello. We're in the north of England once
again with three music lovers joining us in the BBC Philharmonic studio at Media
City in Salford. The winner will be the one who demonstrates the widest
knowledge of music in all its varieties. Let's meet today's trio. Hello, I'm Rob
Cayley from Wirral and the first single I bought was Wheels' Chachow by Jollos.
Hello, I'm Julie Coburn from Staley Bridge in Cheshire and my first single I
bought was Abba Summer Night City. Hello, I'm Charles Dusting from Worcester and
my first single was Desmond Decker in the Aces and the Israelites. Welcome all
three of you. Here's a rapid refresher of the rules. In the opening round I ask
you musical general knowledge questions in turn for two points apiece. If you
can't get the right answer to your own question, I'll open it up for a possible
bonus point for someone else. To quote Stevie Wonder, don't you worry about a
thing. We'll start with your first question, Rob Cayley. In 2000, Barbara Dixon
won a Lawrence Olivier Award for Best Actress in a Musical. She received the
accolade for her role as Viv Nicholson, the Yorkshire housewife who became
famous after she and her husband won a fortune on the football pools in 1961.
The musical is named after Nicholson's response to a reporter who asked her what
she'd do with her newfound riches. What is the musical called? Spin, spin, spin.
That's correct. Julie Coburn. Let's spend some time listening to music from
Bizet's Carmen. Here's a recent recording of Sir Simon Rattle conducting the
Berlin Philharmonic with Magdalena Koshina in the title role. In this scene at
the end of Act I, Carmen performs a segadilla as part of her plan to do what?
She's going to Liliana Pasta's. To order dinner? To drink Mancini. No, no. I'm
going to stop that one right there and ask if anyone else knows what she's going
to do. Charles. Is it too abscond with Don Jose to the country? I'm sorry. I
don't think either of you have been specific enough. She wants to seduce and
then free herself from Don Jose. Charles, here's your question. From southern
Spain to a mountain on the border between Germany and Austria, first performed
in 1915, which work by Richard Strauss for an orchestra of 125 players,
including a wind machine, depicts the 11 hours from dawn until midnight spent
climbing the Zugspitzer? An Alpine symphony? Yes, that's right. Rob, early in
this year's series, we enjoyed questions celebrating the British ska scene, but
we'd completed the recording before we heard of the death of Terry Hall, the
singer with the specials and the fun boy three. Here's Terry now, a question to
follow. The fun boy three's recording of our lips are sealed. It was a top 10
hit in Britain in 1983, but it was originally recorded by which American band
whose lineup included Belinda Carlisle and Jane Weedland? Was it the Lalas? Oh,
I'm sorry. You don't know how close you are, but you're so far away. And Julie
says... The Go-Go's. That's right. It's not the Lalas. It's the Go-Go's for a
bonus point. And Julie, here is your own question. When Oasis released their
fourth studio album in 2000, the story goes that the inspiration for its title
came when Noel Gallagher noticed the inscription on the edge of a two pound coin
while having a drink and a pub. The quote on the coin was part of a letter Sir
Isaac Newton wrote in 1676, acknowledging his debt to other scientists. Can you
name this album? Dick Your Own Soul. I'm afraid that's not it. Does anyone else
want to pick up Rob? On the Shoulders of Giants. I'll give you that. It's
Standing on the Shoulder of Giants. The actual Newton phrase was shoulders
rather than shoulder. Charles Dusting, music for you from the American band
Santana. Here's their first UK hit, an instrumental which originally featured on
their 1970 album. The album is named after a deity associated with the mystic
practices of early Christians. After you've heard Samba Pati, I'd like you to
name it. A Braxis. A Braxis is indeed the name of that album. Two points. Rob
Cayley, the Church of St. Thomas where Johann Sebastian Bach composed many of
his greatest works and where his remains are now buried is in which German city?
Leipzig. Yes, that's right. Julie, music for you. Check ignition. Here's David
Bowie's Space Oddity with a question to follow. This is ground control to Major
Tom. You've really made the grave. And the papers want to know who shirts you
wear. Now it's time to leave the capsule if you dare. This is Major Tom to
ground control. I'm stepping through the door. What may strike people as an
oddity with the song is that Bowie composed the melody on an electronic
instrument mainly marketed to children. It was a miniature analog stylus
operated keyboard invented in 1967 by Brian Jarvis with what name? Stylophone.
That's right. For two points. Charles Dusting in 2023, one of the north of
England's major orchestras announced the appointment of a new chief conductor,
the Finnish maestro John Storgards. His illustrious predecessors include John
Andrea Noseda and Jan Pascal Tortelier. Which orchestra is he joining? BBC
Philharmonic Orchestra. That's right. Who's home we are lucky enough to be
sitting in right now. Rob, music again. In January 2023 we lost one of the great
guitar virtuosos. Jeff Beck died aged 78. He influenced generations of musicians
with his unique sound. And there's a classical connection to many of his
performances and recordings. Here's one of his breakthrough tracks from 1967.
Can you identify whose famous ostinato is being given the Beck treatment here?
That's right. Julie, a playlist on the CBBC website includes the following
songs. The Puritans, Court Me Maybe, the Magna Carta Rap Battle, Good
Vaccinations, and Charles II, the King of Bling. They're all taken from a TV
series that's part of which very successful educational entertainment franchise?
Horrible Histories. You're right. Charles, finally for this round. Here's
Manfred Honeck and the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra's 2022 recording of
Beethoven's Symphony No. 6, also known as the Pastoral Symphony. Reflecting the
composer's love of nature, it's one of a handful of his orchestral works
containing programmatic content. Here's the first movement. Can you give me at
least the gist of Beethoven's subtitle? Pleasant feelings arising from visiting
the country. Yes, yes. Awakening of happy feelings on arrival in the
countryside. Let us hope I awaken some happy feelings when I announce these
scores. After the opening round in third place with five points is Julie Coburn.
Laying second with seven points is Rob Cayley. And in the lead with eight points
is Charles Dusting. It is obviously very close. In our second round, our
competitors take turns in the spotlight for individual questions on a musical
category or theme. They'll choose from a list they've never heard until now and
for which they've had no chance to prepare. Here are today's choices. There is
nothing like a dame. It's written on the wind. Journeys with John Barry. The
music of 1980s teen movies and classical music at the BBC. You choose in the
order of your scores at this point. So Charles Dusting, you're in the lead. What
would you like? classical music at the BBC, please. And for you, Rob Cayley. I'd
like journeys with John Barry. And that leaves three for Julie and they are.
There is nothing like a dame. It's written on the wind and the music of 1980s
teen movies. I'll try the music of 1980s teens movies, please. OK, we start with
you, Julie Coburn, and your questions on teen movies of the 1980s. In which 1985
John Hughes film do five students emerge from detention to the soundtrack of the
Simple Minds song Don't You Forget About Me? The Breakfast Club. That's right.
One of those Breakfast Club students was Molly Ringwald, who the following year
would star in another Hughes film, Pretty in Pink. In one memorable scene, her
friend Ducky serenades her by lip syncing to the following song by which artist?
Is it Otis Redding? It is Otis Redding singing Try a Little Tenderness. David
Foster and John Parr provided music for a 1985 Joel Schumacher film about a
group of college friends. The film shares its title with the phenomenon in which
a luminous electrical discharge appears on a ship or aircraft during a storm.
What's it called? St. Elmo's Fire. Correct. Two of the stars of St. Elmo's Fire,
Rob Lowe and Demi Moore, would reunite in 1986 for the film About Last Night.
Here's music used as the backdrop to one of their tender love scenes. It's
provided by an American singer songwriter whose backing band was the Silver
Bullet Band. Can you name him? Yeah, living inside, living inside, inside my
heart, inside my heart. Sorry, I don't know that. That was Bob Seger singing
Living Inside My Heart. In the 1989 Cameron Crowe film Say Anything, music
speaks louder than words. To express feelings for his girlfriend, Lloyd, played
by John Cusack, makes use of Peter Gabriel's In Your Eyes. But by what method
does he play the song to her in one of cinema's iconic love scenes? Path. He
holds a boom box above his head outside her bedroom window. Great scene. Check
it out. Here's a part of Basil Paul Doris's score for a film based on a 1908
novel where two children are marooned on a tropical island. When you've heard
the love theme, I'd like you to name the movie. I don't know that either. Pass.
Sorry. That was, believe it or not, the love theme from The Blue Lagoon. Finally
in this round, which 1988 film sees Tom Hanks and Robert Loggia perform the
songs Heart and Soul and Chopsticks on a toy store's large walking piano? It's
not big. It is big. The film was big. The scene was big. And so was your round.
You got eight points added to your previous five. You now have 13 points. Rob
Kaley, we are now going to take Journeys with John Barry. The name John Barry is
synonymous with the music of the James Bond movie franchise. Beginning his
association in 1962, his last score was for the 1987 film The Living Daylights.
His music in that film provided a backdrop to which 007 actors travels around
Vienna, Gibraltar and Afghanistan. Timothy Dalton. That's right. Barry makes a
cameo appearance in the film as a conductor. Time for music. We head to 20th
century colonial Kenya. Which film is this? Out of Africa. That was Out of
Africa. Our next journey takes us to the Australian Outback for the 1971 film
Walkabout, where a boy and a girl are lost in a desert. In the final scene,
Barry's score is accompanied by a poem by A. E. Houseman with these closing
lines. That is the land of lost content. I see it shining plain. The happy
highways where I went and cannot come again. What's the name of this poem?
Sorry, no, no. A Shropshire Lad. Here's a part of Barry's score to a 1990 film
which tells the story of Lieutenant assigned to a remote Western Civil War
outpost where he befriends wolves and Native Americans. A question will follow.
We just heard the John Dunbar theme from Dances with Wolves. Several years after
the release of the movie, Don Black worked with Barry to add words to the score.
The song is regularly performed by operatic artists and military choirs. What's
its title? Sorry, I've not heard it. Here's to the heroes. In 1980, Barry
composed music for a film which has the following tagline, which I'd like you to
complete. Once they said God himself couldn't sink her. Then they said, no man
on earth could reach her. Now you will be there when they... Raising the
Titanic? Exactly. For two points. 2023 is the 90th anniversary of John Barry's
birth. In 1998, he recorded an album of his memoirs. The music reflects his
childhood and early years in York with the magnificent minster silhouetted
against the setting sun. He also takes inspiration from the skyline of New York
City, where he lived at the time of his death in 2011. After you've heard the
title track, I'd like you to name the work. The Beyondness of Things. That was
The Beyondness of Things for two points. Throughout his career, Barry took
several journeys to the podium to collect awards. Although he wasn't present to
collect his very first Oscars, he achieved them for Best Original Music Score
and Song, for which 1966 film, based on a novel by Joy Adamson. Born Free. That
is correct for two points. And in that round, Rob Cayley, you've scored ten
points. Added to your previous seven, you now have 17 points. Charles Dusting,
here are your questions. Classical music at the BBC. Over the years, Sir Adrian
Bolt, Sir Malcolm Sargent, Sir Colin Davis and Sakare Oromo have been chief
conductors of which British orchestra? BBC Symphony Orchestra. That's right.
Here are the BBC Symphony Orchestra conducted by Sir Andrew Davis in the first
movement of a symphony commissioned by the BBC in the early 1930s. Sadly, the
work remained unfinished at the time of the composer's death in 1934. Can you
tell me his name and the number of the symphony? Elgar Third Symphony. Correct
for both points. Michael Tippett's Sweet in D was commissioned by the BBC in
1948 to celebrate the birth of which member of the Royal Family? Well, now King
Charles III, but Prince Charles. That is correct. The Henry Wood Proms have been
a mainstay of the BBC's classical music coverage since the late 1920s. In 2022,
a sense of normality returned after the pandemic years with appearances by many
international orchestras. They included the Berlin Philharmonic under chief
conductor Kirill Petrenko performing a Mahler Symphony. It's been nicknamed Song
of the Night. And after you've heard it, I'd like you to tell me which numbered
symphony it is. The Seventh Symphony. That was Symphony No. 7. There were more
exceptional symphony performances at the BBC Young Musician competition for
2022, which was won by 18-year-old Jordan Ashman from Cambridgeshire, playing
which type of instrument? Percussion? Yes. Here's another BBC Young Musician of
the Year, the cellist Sheku Kenimason, performing on Intune on Radio 3. Can you
name this work by the Spanish composer Pablo Casals? Song of the Birds? That is
right, the Song of the Birds. In 2013, BBC Four produced a documentary about a
British composer's long association with the corporation. His music reached
early television audiences, from elaborately staged studio operas to intimate
duets featuring Peter Piers, to the massive Proms performance of his War
Requiem. Who is he? Benjamin Britten. Benjamin Britten. And that is correct. And
so, Charles Dusting, you have achieved a perfect round. 14 points. Added to your
previous eight, you now have 22 points. After the individual round, here's how
things stand. Lying third with 13 points is Julie Coburn. In second place with
17 points is Rob Cayley. And our leader with just one round to go with 22
points, Charles Dusting. It's on the button. In the quick-fire final round,
things can change quickly. A correct answer wins you one point. But you lose a
point if you flash in and fail to answer correctly. There are no bonuses.
Fingers poised. Here we go. In which Michael Jackson song is the Midnight Hour?
Close at hand, Rob Cayley. Thriller. According to the Kinks song, who was in a
club down at Old Soho? Julie? Lola? Yes. The music in the first act of which
popular Puccini opera references the Star-Spangled Banner? And Charles says? The
Girl from the Golden West. Oh, I'm sorry, it's Madam a Butterfly. Minus one. How
many musicians will you find in an octet? Julie? Eight. Yes. The score to
Quentin Tarantino's film The Hateful Eight, one which composer, his first ever
competitive Oscar? An Oscar for The Hateful Eight went to Ennio Morricone, which
Philharmonic's home is the David Geffen Hall, located in the Lincoln Center for
the Performing Arts. Julie? New York? That's right. New York Philharmonic, which
song co-written by David Bowie and Iggy Pop, shares its name with the 1956 film
about the life of Vincent van Gogh. And Julie says? Lost for life. Yes, you get
the point. Which band, who had a 1980 hit with Poison Ivy, share their name with
the brand of motor scooter? Charles? The Lambrettas. That's right. Which musical
tells the story of a lounge singer forced to join a convent after being placed
in a witness protection program? Whoopi, its sister act. At a concert at
Manchester's Free Trade Hall in 1966, what name was shouted at Bob Dylan for
using electronic instruments? Charles? Judas? That's right. The Australian
singer-songwriter Sia voiced Mrs. Tiggywinkle in which 2018 film? And Julie
says? Cops? No, Peter Rabbit. What operatic term takes its name from a French
word meaning opening? Rob? Overture. Yes. Located in Manchester, which
conservatoire is known by the abbreviation RNCM? Julie? Royal Northern College
of Music. That's right. The Marimba is found in which section of the orchestra,
Charles? Percussion. Yes. The 2014 trivia book Can't Get Her Out of My Head is
about which singer? Julie? Kylie Minogue. Yes. Bruce Dickinson is the lead
vocalist of which heavy metal band? And Julie says? I Am Maiden. For the point.
Which 20th century tone poem by Sibelius refers to the nymphs in Greek mythology
who inhabited the Mediterranean Sea? Charles? The Oceana days? Yes, that's
right. Jerry St. Clair was the compair and club singer and Julie says? Phoenix
Night. Yes. According to a song by Kraftwerk. On which train would you leave
Paris? Then travel and Julie says? Trans-Europe Express. That's correct.
Finally, which word describes Lip Sync's town, the goodies Gibbon? And Jasper
Carrots? Moped. Julie? Funke. That is right. And let us reveal the funky final
scores. Third, with 19 points is Rob Cayley. Runner up with 22 points is Julie
Coburn. And the winner with 25 points is Charles Dusting. Very well done,
Charles Dusting. We'll see you again in just a few weeks time in the semi-
finals. Thanks to the other two of you, of course, for a very high scoring
contest. Join us next time when we'll be in London to meet another trio of music
lovers playing Counterpoint. Until then, from Media City in Salford. Goodbye.
And if you missed any of the details of the music played in tonight's show, you
can find them listed on the Radio 4 website. Just look for Counterpoint. The
quiz is chaired by Paul Gambaccini and produced in Salford by Paul Bajoria. On
BBC Radio 4... We are all a unique accumulation of our own unique experiences
and knowledge. The poet Lem Sisay looks at uniqueness. Rainfall, like applause,
is utterly unique every time at hand. Reflecting on the occasions he's stood
out. In a room full of graduates, people without degrees can sometimes get
defensive about it. Not me! Lem Sisay is the one and only. He'll like an awe.
Starting next Friday morning at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4
we are opening the door to Simon Armitage's writing shed in the Pennine Hills to
find out who his guest is. And the poet laureate has gone to his shed. All the
way from the West Country and from the world of brass bands with his trumpet at
the ready, my guest in the shed today is composer, conductor, multi-
instrumentalist and music producer Simon Dobson. Simon, welcome to the shed.
Thanks, it's nice to be here. There's a way of talking about where you grew up.
Can we just talk about accents to begin with? Is yours a classic Cornish accent,
would you say? Or is there something more nuanced and localised about it? I
think it's changed a lot over the years. It got pretty strong when I was in my
sort of mid to late teens. What, as a way of letting people know where you lived
or where you were from? Well I just didn't really, hadn't really left much.
Other than doing the odd concert where I took a coach or something, you know,
that's where I lived, that's where we hung out, that's where all the social time
was. So yeah, me and my friends used to, we ended up with pretty thick accents.
And then I went to London to study when I was 18 and it just disappeared very
quickly. Where about St Cornwall did you grow up? In a place called Launston,
right smack in mid-Cormel. Although it is lovely, it's not the kind of Cornwall
that everyone in the world thinks Cornwall looks like. But it was a cool place
to grow up, that's for sure. Plymouth is very much my home now. But then I feel
like if I go down into deepest darkest Cornwall, that's where my kind of heart
feels the most at home. It's just the best place in the world. On the right day,
there's nowhere more beautiful, ever. Let's get on to talking about music. Were
you one of those infuriating kids, you know, that can play harpsichord at the
age of one? No, it definitely wasn't. But I started playing the cornet when I
was like four. And I think my dad gave me a toy cornet with like a kazoo in it
when I was three. And it's just all I, I didn't want to do anything but play
with this silly toy kazoo. To me it was literally play. It was how I had the
most fun. And because my dad was in a brass band, I would just hear players
playing all the time. I would go to practices with my dad. And I just, it's all
I wanted to do. I remember when I was like eight, I would sit in my room on a
weekend and just play for seven or eight hours. Was it because you wanted to
hear music or because you wanted to make music? I think both. I thought about
that a lot because it's funny that I was obsessed with it as a child and it's
still my complete obsession. It consumes me, you know. So I think probably both.
I've never really done anything else. I keep trying to get a hobby. I've started
climbing, which is really fun. I'm really enjoying that. And it's the first
thing in my entire adult life that I've stuck to for more than like a month. So
you mentioned your dad. Was your dad sort of generally music or was it
specifically brass bands? As far as I'm aware, my dad was a brass band. That's
it. He loved brass bands. He played the double B flat tubas, which is the
biggest brass instrument in the brass band. My earliest memories of hearing him
practice upstairs. So I started in a kind of little fourth section brass band.
You know how brass bands work like football leagues? Sort of, but not really.
Can you explain it? Brass bands have leagues in exactly the same way that
football does. So fourth, third, second, first championship. The same as the
Premier League. The Premier League, yeah. And you get promoted and really get
it. Yeah, exactly the same. So I started in like a low division brass band. Non-
league. It wasn't far off non-league. It was lost with the old brass 88. It was
called. I was only five when I joined. And then I think by the time I was 10 or
11, it was time for me to move on. And really the only step for me, my dad
played in the local championship division brass band. And I just joined that on
like the lowest possible corner. Yeah. And I, you know, they paid for lessons
and drove me around and were super supportive. They could see I loved it. So I
don't think it was really that much hard work for anyone to get me to do it.
It's associated, isn't it, with working class communities? Is that because brass
instruments are relatively cheap compared with orchestral instruments? That's
partly it. That's partly it because there's only so much you can spend on a
brass instrument unless you're buying something which is purposefully custom
built. You can buy an entire set and then you'll really try as a brass band.
Well, come back to talking about banding in a minute. You went up country then,
didn't you? Oh, right up to the massive big smoke. Up to the shining metropolis
of London to study at the Royal College of Music. So would you say at that point
you were being classically trained? Yeah. Yeah. I went there specifically to
avoid brass bands. I knew if I went to a college that was really heavy into
that, I wouldn't escape it. And that's all I'd ever do. Why did you want to
escape it at that point? Because it's within the musical world, a very small
part of music making. And because I studied as a composer, not a player. So I
knew if I went to a brass band college, I'd just write for brass bands, you
know. And then as soon as I got to the Royal College of Music, I got to write
for orchestras and win quintets and all sorts of weird stuff. And so that was
great for me. But just after I finished my degree, I found out my application
was given due gravitas because the college were trying to up their brass band
thing. And by having me there, they were able to do that because, you know,
within not long I was conducting the college brass band and depping for the
conductor there. And then I started writing for that band. And then I started a
brass band in London called Zone One Brass. So I was getting kind of this much
wider look at music. I was looking at your Wikipedia entry and it said, earning
his music degree and graduating to the sounds of his own fanfare. What's that
about? So I don't know how it quite out happened. I think it's just because I
was the brass guy, but I ended up being like the college fanfare writer. For
example, you know, I very much these days kind of align myself with the punk
scene. I think the punkest thing I've ever done in my life is that I made the
Queen wince. With a bum note. No, with a particularly wild and aggressive
fanfare. So one of the wings of the Royal Albert Hall, the wing that faces the
Royal College of Music was closed for refurbishment for like two whole years.
And when it was reopened, I wrote this fanfare for this huge fanfare band, like
20 players or something. So the Queen came around the corner and we started this
mad fanfare and the trombones played this kind of really angular, tight cluster
chord and we're glissandering at the same time, like that. And apparently the
Queen took a like a sidestep and winced. Put that on your CV. It is on my CV.
Were you something, are you still something of, you know, the bad boy of the
classical music scene through college? I'm just thinking that you don't fit the
stereotype. If you allow me to talk about the stereotype, you know, you do a
good line in, in long hair and piercing and tattoos. If I were casting you, I'd
go more Guns N' Roses or flocks of pink Indians than, you know, the Burley
Philharmonic. I never fitted in at all. I never fitted in at all. I felt I feel
like it took me a long time to be accepted. It's not a particularly savage
scene, but it is quite old fashioned. Traditional. Very traditional. Yeah. And I
think it took people a long time to look past how I looked and the fact that I'd
started getting tattoos and piercings and stuff. But I don't think, possibly
within the brass band world, a lot of the music that I ended up writing, like
when I was reaching the peak of my involvement. Was kind of quite new for the
movement. And it was something that I think they thought was scary. I didn't
think it was scary, but I've heard people describe my music as modern rubbish
and all this kind of stuff. And that never really bothered me. I think it just
took a while for everyone to get to grips with it. Now, of course, like I'm 40
now and I've got really long hair and a mustache. I sort of look like I should
be in my motor head or something. And like no one cares anymore. So it's great.
I've got like this kind of cloak of anonymity. No one would ever expect I did
brass bands at all. But do you think you met resistance because of the way you
wrote? For sure. Yeah, I did. I definitely did. I remember definitely being
shouted at and teased quite a bit when I was much younger. But the thing is,
once you start, I started writing pieces for competitions that were held in the
Royal Albert Hall and the European Brass Band Championships. A lot of bands
started playing my music and doing really well with it. Once you've done that,
people sort of have to shut up. That's quite punk, I think. How do you import
punk sensibilities into brass band sounds? How do you orient that in a different
direction? I think a lot of what I brought to it from that angle was subject
matter. I was right about things that I don't think anyone's really written
about before. One of my earliest pieces, I did a whole piece about
hallucinogenics. I based all of the base material of the piece that I built the
composition out of. I built that all on the scientific name for acid. A chemical
equation. Yeah. I wrote a piece called Horror Show about the shooting at the
Bataclan, the metal club there. That was a really heavy metal piece considering
it's for brass band. I'm sort of hoping that that opens some people's eyes to a
world that they weren't part of. That's kind of what I intended, I think. How
does the typical brass band differ from the typical orchestra? That's a really
good question. I suppose most of the people in brass bands will be amateurs.
That's the main difference, I think. People mostly buying and buying orchestras
are getting paid to be in orchestras. People in brass bands are amateurs. Is
there a class distinction? Do you think that people see orchestras as kind of
high art? 100%. Yeah. But they think of brass bands as something hobbyist and...
Yeah, 100%. I think that's always been the problem and that's still the problem
with the public perception of brass bands. Brass bands are very much... Well,
they're just 100% are a working class thing. They were born out of working
class. In many ways, they still are. Orchestras have always been the opposite.
This is one thing that I think connects where I live here in West Yorkshire with
where you grew up in Cornwall. The brass bands, and they were all associated
with industry, really. With mills and with mines. And because a lot of those
communities are breaking down, I think the bands sometimes struggling for
identity or even existence. Yeah, I think there's very, very few bands left who
still kind of are part of the place where the band was birthed. I think some of
them still got the names, but that's pretty much it these days. When it very
first started, it would have been to give the people who worked at a factory or
the mill a focus and good times for sure. I don't think there's any of that left
now. Not that I can think of anyway. And there were family institutions where
the instruments were often handed down as well as the practice and the knowledge
of the craft. Yeah, sure. That's why it's such a beautiful thing and why I will
never let it go completely. Even though my musical career has kind of very much
moved away from brass bands, but you can't go to an orchestra and get free
tuition and a free instrument. And know that you're going to have that until
you're good enough to be in that orchestra. That's just not how it works. Brass
band you can. A little boy can just, like I did, wander into a brass band room
and say, I want to play that one. And then you get an instrument and someone in
the brass band will teach you until you're good enough to play. And then that's
it. That's amazing, isn't it? Even though I've never been particularly involved
in that world, the noise of brass, when I hear it, it just sort of melts me. And
whether it's to do with heritage or thinking about ancestors. But there's a kind
of luminous quality to me when band starts. And it probably reminds me as well
of Christmas in the village where I grew up because the band would go around and
they'd walk around the streets on Christmas morning and they would play carols.
And it was a big collecting time for them as well. You'd go out and put some
money in their bucket. Yeah, it's unreal. I mean, when a band sounds good, the
ensemble playing is tight and the tuning is good. There's very few things that
sound as glorious, I think. But that's not to say they don't have more of a
range than that because some of the mad stuff I ended up writing for brass
bands. I think most people would have no idea that a brass band could sound any
different to how it normally sounds. But yeah, when it hits, there's nothing
like it. Quite recently I went to the Albert Hall to watch a screening of the
film Brass Stuff. Oh yeah. And it was very meta because... Was it called Grimy
on the stage? Yeah, exactly what you call it. Grimy thought, Colliery Band.
Grimy, yeah. Grimy, yeah. So they were playing the score of the film. And of
course the film culminates at the Albert Hall as well. Yeah, the film doesn't
pull any punches either. There's some really heavy moments in that film. But
looking back on it, I think actually that movie did really good things for brass
bands because it showed how much it meant to people. I think that's really the
most important thing that film did, is it showed how deeply ingrained brass
bands were, I hope still are. The other thing, which is a recollection, is Whit
Friday. Oh man. Have you taken part in that? Yeah. That's wild. The whole thing
is so wild. Anybody who doesn't know, this is what, a series of band
competitions that take place around Saddleworth. Yeah. And you can hear the
border from here, just over that hill behind your head actually. But I just
remember it as being very beer-y. Yeah. Lots of bands all in their beautiful
jackets and tunics. Yeah. Playing in a series of villages for what, a series of
competitions and prizes? Every village has its own competition. And I mean, the
last time I did it, my band was like, right, we're going to do this seriously
now. You'd hire a local person from a local brass band who wasn't taking part
and they'd be called your runner. And you'd sit on the bus in order that you
would play. Do you mean in the physical order that you would march down the
street? In the physical order that you would march down the street. Yeah. So
you're wasting as little time as possible. You'd get off, so you'd play one
march on the actual road march and then you'd play on the stand. And then the
runner would always be on the phone or run into phone boxes to find out what the
situation was with traffic and how many other bands were queued up at other
competitions. Because I think we went home with like 16 grand in prize money one
year. And I remember one particular competition. Delve, Dob Cross, Greenfield,
Dopamil. Perhaps it was Dob Cross. We got there at the same time as, I think it
was Black Dyke Band. And basically that's why you have a runner. They help you
around, but they also, their job is to sign you in before the other band get a
chance to do it. They're the band to beat, aren't they? They're kind of famous,
aren't they? Oh, they're the band, yeah. They're them and Brig House and quite a
thought pin. So yeah, the runners got off and there was a full on 200 yard
sprint between our runner and Black Dyke's runner to sign us in. So that we got
to play before them and so we could ship off first. But I've done some boozy
ones as well. Where are the judges in all this? They have to hide behind hedges.
Yeah, there's one where the judge is always in a caravan. There's definitely one
where the judge is in like the upstairs window of a pub. It's hilarious. So you
seem to have a foot in two camps, well in three camps if we can imagine for a
moment that you've got three feet. The world of brass, the world of classical
music and the world of rock and roll. So you've got credibility in all those
three stands. Is that a game plan of yours or is it just a natural expression of
your interests and talents? I came up sort of simultaneously through brass
bands, which I would kind of lump in with classical music and rock and roll, I
suppose. Because when I got to howl, like sixth form, I just immediately
gravitated towards all the kids who were making that kind of music. That was the
wild side that I hadn't been able to express being kind of little brass band
kick going to brass band rehearsals rather than school discos. I adored the
music, still do, you know, like three quarters of my job now is involved in the
kind of rock and metal and punk scene, which is awesome. I love that. I never
expected at any point that the two ways I came up would converge into a career,
but they have. So, you know, I've got my orchestra, the parallax orchestra. All
of the work we do is with heavy metal bands. And to be able to stand on a podium
conducting orchestral arrangements that I've written for an orchestra and a
metal band and perform it, if I even hinted at my younger self that that might
have been possible, there's nowhere to believe it. So I definitely didn't intend
to be the heavy metal strings guy, but I've been doing that on the way up today.
So I sort of am the heavy metal strings guy, which makes me really happy.
Amazing. We've come to the either or section in the program. Okay, ready to go?
Yeah. Trumpet or trombone? Trumpet. A good book or a good film? A good film. The
A30 or the A38? The A30. A30. Where does it go? Is it Penzance? Yeah, all the
way down. All the way down. Yeah. The beach or the mountain? The beach. Black
Dike Band or Idols? Idols. Jam first with cream on top or cream first with jam
on top? Jam first with cream on top. Is that the Cornish word? That's my way in
the stick and two. It's controversial, isn't it? Yeah, it really is. God or no
God? No God. Necklace or bracelet? Necklace. Buried or cremated? Cremated. A
beautiful horse or a beautiful motorbike? A beautiful motorbike. Bait or brassed
off? I like it when I feel as if I've hit the spot. Yeah, that is the sweet spot
right there, that one is, because they're both really important. I tell you
what, I'm going to betray my heritage here and say bait because it's such a
gloriously made film. Big up Mark Jenkins. North Cornish Coast or South Cornish
Coast? North Cornish Coast. The Royal Albert Hall or the Royal Opera House or
Boardmasters Festival? Boardmasters is a bit rough actually. I think I'll go
with the Royal Albert Hall. And finally, and we'll come back to this later,
Butterfly or Moth? Butterfly. Can we talk about a particular piece of yours,
Penley? Yeah. About the Penley lifeboat disaster of 1981. I've been listening to
this piece all week. Can you just say how you came to write it? So I was born
just before it happened and my mum was in hospital for a long time. I was in an
incubator and stuff and she remembers hearing about it on the news as it was
happening. So she told me about this when I was very young and it's kind of just
weirdly always been part of my life, especially living in Cornwall. It's just,
it's still so raw. So the Union Star ship, which was like a cargo ship, got in
trouble around the base of Cornwall. And rather than stop and let, there was a
very small crew and the captain, instead of stopping and letting his family off,
he thought, I'm going to plough on. I think he was aware that he was breaking
some insurance rules. And the ship got into a lot of trouble and the Penley
lifeboat was scrambled from Mowzall right near Christmas. Bunch of guys launched
into, I think it was a force nine storm, something absurd like that in a wooden
lifeboat, the Solomon Brown, with, if truth be told, probably no chance of
survival. I think they knew what was happening. In fact, I'm aware that they
were told that only one member of each family could go, because that's quite
often lifeboats from father and son. And they got told only one member of each
family. So they don't lose everybody. They don't lose everybody at the same
time. And of course, no one came back. But there was some amazing stories being
told by the Seaking, which was launched from Cauldrose, I think. The helicopter.
The helicopter who saw a lot of what was happening and he saw that they'd
actually got a lot of people off this ship. And I mean, I can't even imagine
that the bravery of those people still makes me emotional even to this day
thinking about it. And basically, when I was about 23, I got commissioned by the
Cornwall Youth Brass Band to write a piece. They said, you do what you want. So
I decided I was going to write this piece, Pen Lee, and have it as a kind of
programmatic for a film that doesn't exist, I suppose. Sort of soundtrack to the
story. It sort of really hit the mark with a lot of people. I think probably to
this day is my by far my most my most performed piece. Very powerful. I actually
like it. I'm really proud of it. It's obviously sad and very moving and it's
full of musical danger and threat. But it also sounded to me as if it were full
of pride. Absolutely. It's a sort of local pride. And in my head, I was making
the connection between the volunteers on the lifeboat and those communities and
the volunteers in the band. There's a there's a similarity there. Yeah, I feel
it's all the same sort of heart, I think, you know, what Cornwall has a lot of
his heart. And I think mostly I just want I wanted I wanted to tell that story
as much as I could, because I feel like more everyone in the world needs to know
about how brave those guys were. And yeah, it's probably had thousands of
performances now, which I'm incredibly humbled by and moved by. But the thing
is, it's also really quite traditional in terms of my output. It's very un-
contemporary considering the music I've written afterwards. Maybe I should
listen to that, you know. Do you think that might have been because with a piece
like that, there's a responsibility to to the great loss and to the people that
survived. And it might not have been the right time or the right thing to do to
to make something that was I want God or experimental. That's the thing I think
really if I'd done any of that kind of thing that would have just been for me,
that would have been selfish. And that piece needed to be as open and wide and
as and as kind of giving thanks as possible, I think, for those people who lost
their lives on the Solomon Brown. And with performance, the premier performance,
we had eight of the ten widows there, which was unreal. And we used the bell. It
finishes a ship's bell and we use the bell from the present Pandy lifeboat. And
it was it was quite something. I'm still always proud when I get to hear it.
You've honored those people and you've memorialized them in in music. Well, I
actually put this quote at the end. I should have said earlier on, I put this
quote at the end. It's kind of above this dissonant thing going on that this
melody comes out at the very end. And that's from probably the most famous brass
band piece ever written, which the piece written by a composer called Eric Ball.
And the piece was called the Resurgam and the lyrics to that big. It's a sali
army piece. The lyrics are the souls of the righteous within the hands of God.
So that's kind of the last word in that piece. And all brass banders knew that
as well. So when they get to that bit, they'll be like, oh, yeah, a bit of a nod
and a wink. Yeah, a bit of a nod and a wink. Yeah. We ask people to bring along
some object, a little totem or a memento, something that's important to them.
What have you got? So I've brought with me, Simon, my mini museum. So it's an
old blown up, more nearly square block of transparent resin. It's about five
inches by five inches. And inside it are lots of tiny things. There's some
Mosasaur, which is a big old dinosaur, a bit of a Mosasaur jaw. And then we've
got some space gems, which are palacitic paradox, which are found inside
meteorites. They're four and a half billion years old. We've got a piece of
samurai sword from the 14th century, some Egyptian papyrus, some mold of light.
That's 14 billion years old. Some giant sloth claw. And there's a part of the
first transatlantic cable. That's pretty cool. That's fantastic. It's so cool. A
bit of Pelé soccer ball. Really? They scored the goal with. Oh, yeah. I mean,
Charles and Diana's wedding cake. That's a highlight for me. Has it been
authenticated? Oh, yeah, it comes with certificates and everything. Yeah. I want
one of those. Yeah, they're so cool. There's three now. A direwolf bone. Yeah.
How cool is that? Clearly, it's a fantastic thing. Why is it important to you?
It's important to me because I'm just a massive nerd, really. I love space. I
love nature. I love things that you can. I just find all that stuff so
unbelievably exciting, especially space stuff. And this is all of those things.
Every now and again, I get it off my shelf and I look at it and I go, wow, look
at that. How cool is that? Well, speaking of miniatures, all things small, I've
been writing poems in the shed. I'm writing poems about butterflies and moths at
the moment. Just got slightly obsessed by them. And instead of writing haikus,
I've been writing fly-kus. Oh, nice. It's sort of 757. So it's the wing and then
it's the body and then it's the wing. Oh, that's nice. This is a little fly-koo
about my granddad. After he'd eaten his sweets, he'd make the wrappers into
butterflies and put them all down on the hearth. Harry Armitage was his name.
The coal fire spits and flickers. He folds sweet papers into marsh fratilleries.
And that's written inside the origami. I can see it all. That's lovely. I don't
think a wind instrument has ever been played in this shed before. Would you do
me the great honor of... I'd happily play you something. And then maybe we could
hear it in the garden. We could send some notes out. It always sounds better
outside. Okay, well, let's put that to the test. A few notes inside and a few
notes outside. Okay. Awake the sleeping valley up over there. Yeah, right. Let's
do that. So I used to conduct brass bands in Norway, which is an amazingly
beautiful place. And I worked sort of all over, but one specific band I
conducted in Oslo, they used to play this really beautiful folk song arrangement
of this... I think the piece was called something like Blammen Blammen. I never
really worked out what it meant or how to pronounce it, but it was a really
gorgeous piece of music. And I thought maybe I'd play a bit of the folk melody
from that. Here we go. Drift out across the fields of West Yorkshire. Yeah,
okay. Terrific. Yeah. Yeah, lovely. Should we hear it outside as well? Sure.
Let's see if you can summon the wood pigeons. Yes! Oh, that's so good. I forgot
to tell you about the wolves. It's so good. As if that happened. Simon Armitage
was talking to Simon Dobson. Next week his guest is Pam Ayres. The poet laureate
has gone to his shed, was produced by Susan Roberts, and a longer version of
this programme is available on BBC Sounds. This is BBC Radio 4.