TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 At 1 hour's GMT, I'm Charlotte Gallagher and this is the Newsroom. Coming up...
Anger on the streets of Athens after last week's deadly train crash. Is Twitter
less safe since Elon Musk's takeover? I would ask why are these accounts that
are bullying and harassing people still allowed on the platform? Also, we look
at the tropical paradise with a deadly dark side. At this point in time, per
capita, as far as consumption of heroin is concerned, Seychelles is number one
in the world. A brutal humiliation for Manchester United. A strong setback and
this is unacceptable and we let the fans down and I'm really disappointed and
angry about it. And why the Toblerone chocolate bar is having a makeover. First,
the news. I'm Stuart McIntosh with the BBC News. Hello. The authorities in
Greece have detained a station master for his alleged role in a train crash that
killed at least 57 people last Tuesday. The man, who can't be named under Greek
law, has been charged with disrupting transport and putting lives at risk. His
lawyer, Stefanos Pansarsidis, said his client was devastated by the disaster.
The accused said everything. He told the truth. He was devastated. He said
exactly what happened without fear that his words would make him bear more
responsibility. If there is evidence that constitutes criminal offences against
him from what he said, it is something that justice will decide. The head-on
collision between two trains near Larissa has sparked widespread anger. There
were further clashes between protesters and police in Athens on Sunday. The
demonstrators blame poor safety standards and cost-cutting for the crash.
Current and former Twitter staff have told the BBC that the company is no longer
able to protect users from online abuse, state-coordinated disinformation and
child sexual exploitation. The former senior designer, Lisa Jennings-Young, says
her entire team, which had worked to keep people safe, had been sacked. A
current employee, who asked to remain anonymous, said job losses had increased
risk. It's like a building where all the pieces are on fire. When you look at it
from the outside, the facade looks fine, but I can see that nothing is working.
Now a totally new person without the expertise is doing what used to be done by
more than 20 people. Well, that leaves room for much more risk, many more
possibilities of things that can go wrong. President Biden has said the right to
vote remains under threat as he marked the anniversary of the 1965 assault by
police of peaceful marchers demanding civil and voting rights for African-
Americans. Standing at the bridge in Selma, Alabama, where the bloody Sunday
assault took place, Mr Biden called for Congress to pass legislation to
strengthen voting in the US. Thousands of Venezuelans have attended a series of
events and rallies to commemorate 10 years since the death of the socialist
president Hugo Chavez. He held office from 1999 to 2013. Will Grant reports. Top
government figures attended the main event in Caracas, as well as international
allies such as the former Bolivian leader Evo Morales and a high-level
delegation from Cuba led by Raul Castro. The two socialist nations, Cuba and
Venezuela, remain close allies, a relationship first established under Mr Chavez
and the late Cuban leader Fidel Castro. During his decade and a half in power,
Hugo Chavez was able to not only fund poverty reduction programmes at home, but
also prop up the alien Cuban revolution with his oil largesse. Under his
successor, Nicolas Maduro, though, the economic outlook has been much bleaker.
This is the World News from the BBC. Estonia's general election has ended with a
clear victory for the Prime Minister's party. Kaja Kallas, a centre-right
politician who is a staunch ally of Ukraine, said she was in a strong position
to lead a new coalition. Her Reform Party's closest challenger was a far-right
movement. It wanted Estonia to stop sending weapons to Ukraine and turn away
refugees fleeing the Russian invasion. Pakistan's media regulator has barred
television channels from broadcasting speeches and comments by the former Prime
Minister Imran Khan. It accused him of hate speech. The move was announced after
hundreds of supporters gathered outside Mr Khan's residence to protest against
police attempts to arrest him. Caroline Davis reports. While the police were
still on site, Mr Khan addressed his supporters in an online broadcast. He
accused the government of filing fake cases against him. The police left without
arresting Mr Khan, saying they had been assured he would follow the law. By the
evening, a new development. Pakistan's media regulator announced that it would
ban Pakistani TV channels from broadcasting speeches and news conferences by Mr
Khan, saying he had levelled baseless allegations against state institutions and
spread hate speech. Protests have been held in the Tunisian capital, Tunis, in
defiance of an official ban prohibiting rallies against President Kais Saïd.
Many in the crowd shouted down with the coup, and hundreds broke through police
cordons. Others at the rally chanted no to racism, after Mr Saïd accused African
migrants of being part of a conspiracy to change Tunisia's demographic profile.
In football, Real Madrid have lost further ground to Barcelona in the Spanish
league after drawing their match late on Sunday at Real Betis. The nil-nil draw
means they are now nine points behind Barcelona in La Liga. They lost to their
Catalan rivals in the first leg of the Spanish Cup semi-final three days ago.
BBC News Hello, you're listening to the Newsroom from the BBC World Service with
me, Charlotte Gallagher. Present and former staff at Twitter have told the BBC
the company is no longer able to protect users from online abuse following mass
sackings and changes under its owner Elon Musk. Academic research and testimony
from Twitter users supports their claims, suggesting abuse is thriving under the
new leadership. Our disinformation correspondent, Marianna Spring, has more.
With more than 350 million users, Twitter's often described as the town square
of the internet. But since Elon Musk took over last October, the company's been
in chaos. The personal abuse I receive on Twitter has tripled, so I headed to
San Francisco to look for answers. Twitter used to have around 7,500 employees.
Now at least half of them have been fired or chosen to leave, including Lisa
Jennings-Young. She worked on features designed to protect users like me from
online hate. Thanks so much for having us. Twitter was not at all perfect, but
we were trying and we were making things better. One of these protective
measures was a nudge function to scan tweets and ask users if they wanted to
reconsider posting something potentially abusive. Twitter's own research, seen
by the BBC, appears to show the nudge and other safety tools being effective. So
overall, 60% of users deleted or edited their reply when given a chance via the
nudge. Is it still happening? Is there anyone working on it? No, there's no one
there to work on that at this time. The nudge does still exist, but when Lisa
and I tried it out, it appeared to be working less consistently. One engineer
still working at Twitter agreed to speak anonymously about what's been unfolding
on the inside. It's like a building where all the pieces are on fire. When you
look at it from the outside, the facade looks fine, but I can see that nothing
is working. Like others I spoke to, he said it's been difficult to maintain
features intended to protect Twitter users from trolling and harassment. People
like Ellie Wilson. While at university in Glasgow, she was raped. She started
sharing her experience as a survivor on social media last summer. But when she
tweeted about her attacker in January, after the takeover, she received dozens
of abusive replies. The trolls' accounts targeting her had become more active
since the takeover. Some were newly created, or appeared to have been reinstated
after Musk's amnesty on previously banned accounts. What would you say to Elon
Musk if you had the opportunity? I would ask why are these accounts that are
bullying and harassing people still allowed on the platform? I would like him to
read some of the messages that I've been sent and tell me why those accounts are
still allowed to be on Twitter. Musk has used votes on Twitter to make decisions
about its future. These polls have no statistical value but having contacted him
every way possible, I used one to try to catch his attention. Over 40,000
Twitter users voted and 89% of them said they'd like Elon Musk to do an
interview with me. Neither Twitter nor Musk have responded to the points raised
in this investigation. Twitter says defending and respecting the user's voice
remains one of its core values. But the users I've spoken to are left with
questions. Marianna Spring. Protestors have again flooded the Greek capital,
Athens, to demand action following last week's deadly train crash. Some
demonstrators set fire to rubbish bins and threw petrol bombs. Police responded
with tear gas and stun grenades. 57 people died in the accident and a state
aviation master has been charged with disrupting transport and putting lives at
risk. Many rail workers though blamed government neglect. Our Europe
correspondent Nick Beek is monitoring developments. The most violent episodes in
today's protest in Athens were brief and isolated. But anger is pulsing across
Greece at the negligence and systemic failings that allowed this disaster to
happen. In the capital, where the police estimate more than 10,000 gathered,
black balloons were released to remember the dozens of people, mainly students,
who were killed. The crash has brought into sharp focus years of underinvestment
in the railway network, as well as antiquated systems. Apologising to the
bereaved families on Facebook, the centre-right Prime Minister Mitsotakis
promised a fast investigation to determine who was at fault. There have now been
three consecutive days of protest in different parts of the country and rail
workers continue to stage rotating walkouts. A Greek government minister has
told the BBC a lack of funding was the direct result of the strict terms of
international bailouts imposed after the 2010 Greek debt crisis. But it feels
this is becoming a defining issue in the next general election, which could be
just weeks away. That was Nick Beek. A series of events and rallies have been
held in Venezuela to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the death of the
President Hugo Chavez. He was hugely popular but divisive and used the country's
vast oil wealth to fund social programmes. Thousands of Venezuelans visited the
mountain barracks mausoleum on Sunday to celebrate the life of Hugo Chavez with
music and singing. Our Central America correspondent Will Grant was based in
Caracas for several years and joins us now from Mexico City. And Will, you
interviewed Hugo Chavez. What was he like? Well, I met him on a number of
occasions, yes, being based there for that time. And I think the way that people
define Hugo Chavez very much depends on their political position. His supporters
who you heard cheering there would define him as little, you know, essentially a
saint, really. They almost deify him in Venezuela, those who adored him in life.
They credit him with pulling millions of people out of poverty. They thank him
for that and will do for as long as they have breath in their bodies, quite
honestly. But of course, the other side of the coin are those who feel that he
just descended the country into an autocracy, made the most of a very high oil
price for the cheapest kind of populism and anti-Americanism. The truth of the
matter is that either way, he is the most important, probably the most
significant political figure to emerge in Latin America of the modern era. And
how has Venezuela changed since he died? Well, his successor, Nicolas Maduro,
who was then his foreign minister, inherited the sort of tail end of the
revolution, if you like. It was beginning to curdle. It was running out of steam
in all sorts of ways, politically, economically significantly. The price of the
barrel of oil, of Venezuelan oil, dropped significantly. Production was
worsening. The lack of investment in the state-run energy company, PDVSA. And so
the most insignificant thing that has happened under the Maduro era is the sort
of collapse of the Venezuelan economy and the subsequent exodus of people from
the country. So many, well, millions essentially young people have attempted to
make other countries in South America or obviously make it to the United States.
And of course, there were very large and significant anti-government protests,
lest we forget, which were met with brutal force by Nicolas Maduro's government
and many hundreds died. And what are the government trying to do to stop this
exodus of people desperately leaving the country? Well, I think one of the first
things that Nicolas Maduro has tried to do in recent years, recent months, I
should say, is to essentially dollarize the economy, not a very kind of
socialist revolutionary economic policy, but one that he was faced with no other
choice in doing such was the weakness of the national currency, the bolivar. I
think ultimately for the Venezuelan socialist revolution to sort of reinvigorate
to the sort of the days that it enjoyed under Hugo Chavez, the key thing is for
its oil price to bounce back and for that investment in PDVSA to allow there to
be the kind of production so that they can make the most of these incredibly
large oil reserves that it has, the largest proven reserves in the world,
actually. So I think as Nicolas Maduro's attempts to sort of shore up the
economy, we may see that that gives him the platform to essentially remain in
power for as long as the United Socialist Party decides that it's going to be
there. Will, thank you. That was Will Grant. You're listening to the BBC World
Service. Next, the Seychelles is known as a tropical paradise, a collection of
islands in the Indian Ocean with a multi-million dollar tourist industry. But
the country is battling a drugs epidemic. Based on the population, it has the
biggest heroin problem in the world. The Seychelles government is taking a hard
line stance, but the problems persist. Joseph Fadi Banan is a former drug user
who has lived on the islands all his life. That's my friend Mimi. We are at the
cemetery, visiting her son's grave for the first time. She tells me she tries
not to show her pain, but today it overwhelms her. Mom, mom, mom, I love you.
Rashid was a heroin user, and at just 20 years old, he died of liver and kidney
failure, most likely caused by contaminated needles. She says the doctor did
everything he could, but Rashid died in front of her. Mimi is a heroin user too,
and she's now smoking crack cocaine as well. Seychelles may have a reputation
for fancy hotels and luxury living, but 25% of islanders live below the poverty
line. For many, drugs are an escape. According to the Agency for the Prevention
of Drug Abuse and Rehabilitation, 10% of the Seychelles population is dependent
on heroin. It's estimated that two tons of heroin is trafficked into the country
every year. Most of it comes from Afghanistan via Iran. Smugglers bring it in on
small boats. It's difficult to police. Seychelles has more than a million square
kilometers of territorial waters. This is Seychelles President Waver Rumkalagon.
The drug situation is very bad. At this point in time, per capita, as far as
consumption of heroin is concerned, Seychelles is number one in the world. And
this is not a coincidence.