TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Tonight at 8. BBC News at 7 o'clock. The Irish Prime
Minister Leo Varadkar said the UK and EU are inching towards agreement on a new
arrangement for trade in Northern Ireland. The original deal done by Boris
Johnson angered many unionists, with the DUP refusing to take part in the power-
sharing executive as a result. Hundreds of people took part in a march in County
Tyrone today, calling for an end to paramilitary violence. It follows the
shooting of an off-duty police officer in Oma on Wednesday. Police have been
given more time to question four of the five men arrested in connection with the
attempted murder of Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell, who remains in
hospital with serious injuries. Finance ministers from the major G20 countries
who have been holding talks in India have failed to agree a closing statement
because of differences over the war in Ukraine. The host, India, said Russia and
China had objected to parts of the document condemning Russian aggression.
Thomas Matysek, the former German ambassador to India, told the PM programme
that many non-Western countries have mixed views about the conflict. I think
India shares the view in many parts of the global south that the West is
overdoing the importance of this as they see a European conflict and don't pay
enough attention to the big issues of the south, like hunger. Police searching
for the crew of a tugboat that overturned off Greenock in Inverclyde yesterday
have recovered two bodies. The families of two missing crew members have been
informed. Several hundred protesters marched through Skegnes to demonstrate
against the housing of asylum seekers in a hotel in the Lincolnshire town. A
similar protest and counter-protest also took part in Newquay in Cornwall. Both
events passed off without any arrests. England have beaten Wales by 20 points to
10 in Cardiff in Ruby Union's Six Nations tournament. In the early game Ireland
beat Italy 34-20 in Rome. The Irish are undefeated and top of the table after
three games. BBC News. On BBC iPlayer. Step right in. Perfect timing. The East
End is ever-changing. What is this? Scooter? The order has entered the 1960s.
Fairly eight years late. But the midwives of Ninata's house are forever
constant. You've a home here now and purpose and people who love you. Call the
midwife. We will be with you every step of the way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. Brian
Cox and Robin Ince are preparing to bid farewell to Australia in the final
edition of a run of programmes recorded down under and tonight it's all about
spiders. That's the infinite monkey cage on Radio 4 in 15 minutes. First Mark
Coles profiles the composer Shirley J. Thompson. Music fit for a king this week.
Some big names ring promise for Charles III's coronation weekend in May. The
Spice Girls and Lionel Richie. Both rumoured to be on the bill for a celebratory
concert in the grounds of Windsor Castle. Midnight, not a sound from the bay.
Cat's composer Andrew Lloyd Webber. That's what I call music. He's written a
special coronation anthem for the ceremony in Westminster Abbey. And there'll
also be new works from some of Britain's leading classical composers. Including
the woman we're profiling this week, Shirley J. Thompson. She is quite unique.
She's a trailblazer. You can't put her in a box and say she's that kind of
composer and she writes that kind of music. Shirley has bridged the gap between
the European classical genre and her African black Jamaican heritage. Thompson,
one of the contemporary classical world's leading lights, and more of an indie
jazz world and wonky beats man myself. So time to bring on an expert I reckon.
My name's Susannah Eastburn and I'm currently Chief Executive of Sound and
Music, which is the UK's national organisation for new music. Perfect. Her music
is incredibly beautiful, very communicative. She's worked in film, she's worked
in dance, she works with orchestras, she works in education. So there's a lovely
mix of things going on. The other thing is also about the story she tells
through her music. Shirley Thompson was born in January 1958 in East Ham in
London's East End, the eldest of five children. We lived in a modest to up to
down, just off of the main high street. Dad worked as a forklift driver at
Virgil Paine factory in Stratford and mum was a district nurse. Parents Samuel
and Hyacinth were in their early 20s when they moved to Britain from Jamaica,
part of the late 1950s windrush generation. Shirley's younger brother Richard
takes up the story. Dad came over first, his ship came into Dover and mum came
over a couple of years later and came to do their bit to help rebuild a war-torn
UK. A father into his music. My dad had a radio ground, a stand alone turntable
with a cup of speakers, a unit on the right and on the left was a small drinks
cabinet and it was all encased in one. You'd have your small shot glasses on the
left. So that was my dad's pride and joy. There was always something being
played, whether it be Roksteady or Blue Beat or Country Western albums from an
early age. There was always musical out. We knew the power of music. Shirley's
own musical awakening started aged three when she came across an old piano in
the attic of her house next door. By four she was playing the recorder, aren't
we all, followed by the violin, which she would doggedly practise in the bedroom
above the family lounge as they struggled to watch TV. Well, there were times
where we felt as though we needed a break. Her parents encouraged her to join
her local choir, the local youth orchestra too, which she went on to lead. She
did well at school, got good grades, until her last year at Primary when
Thompson told a recent TEDx Jamaica event she felt teachers inexplicably started
marking her down. And that for me was a watershed moment when all my friends
went to the grammar school and I, a girl of colour by coincidence, were sent off
to the worst school in the borough. The family suspected discrimination. Her
mother demanded to see the education chief, took Shirley's school reports with
her and eventually got the decision overturned. Our mum, a really forthright
woman, she would have gone to the ends of the earth for any of her children.
During school summer holidays, Shirley would be put in charge of her siblings
tasked with keeping them entertained. Shirley was instrumental in, you know,
planning all of our games. As the youngest, Richard would often find himself
rolled up in a blanket, his sister and the others lifting him up and swinging
him round and round in circles at speed. I couldn't see anything at all. Sounds
terrifying. Will you not shout his shirlies? Stop it! I think I was too
terrified to vocalise anything. Shirley herself excelled at more conventional
sports, netball, long jump and sprinting. But her mum, not to be messed with,
said no to focusing on sport, thought studying was a far better option. So in
1976 Shirley applied to study music, along with history, at Liverpool
University. Professor Robert Orlage remembers interviewing her back then. She
showed us a piece that she'd written for a trio, for a flute, piano and violin.
It wasn't like anything that students normally do not have. I think we offered
her a place without any aid of us, actually. It was while at Liverpool she first
met close friend Joan St John, the pair of them regularly out clubbing and going
to gigs. Earth Wind and Fire, I think was a particular favourite of hers, but
Shirley loves any music. It could be Soul, it could be Reggae, it could be
various different types of music. Music eventually got the upper hand over
history. Thompson an enthusiastic student, but determined to find her own
musical direction. To Liverpool she went to do a Masters in Composition at
London's Goldsmiths College, juggling it with working for a music publishing
company, using the money she earned to visit Jamaica for the first time.
Thompson eager to learn about her heritage, recalls distant cousin Steadman
Fuller, now Governor General of the Jamaican capital, Kingston. I call her a
cultural historian because she comes back and she wants to capture detail of the
lineage of the family and also meeting up with younger generations of the
family. Keen on her Jamaican food too. Yes, whenever she comes to Jamaica we
make sure that she goes out to get a serving of real authentic Jamaican meal,
especially prepared oxtail in Jamaican style, or whether it's one of four dishes
of Caribbean fish. Back in the land of pie and mash, Thompson's first major
commission was for London's Greenwich International Festival, a chamber
orchestral work about Caribbean nations and their vision for self-determination.
In the late 80s and early 90s she turned to writing for film and television. Her
music for TV drama series South of the Border, selected as one of the BBC's top
20 themes back then. By the mid 90s she'd formed the Shirley Thompson Ensemble,
an unusual mix of instrumental soloists, singers, dancers, visual artists and
poets. She brings who she is into her music, her East London Jamaican origin,
her faith, all of those things are important and I think they feed into her
work. She was hired for her first Royal Engagements, performing for the Queen at
Westminster Abbey in 1999, then commissioned to compose a large-scale work to
commemorate the Golden Jubilee in 2002. Money, no object, she was told. It led
to New Nation Rising, a 21st century symphony, her first full orchestral work. A
huge piece celebrating a thousand year history of London, taking in watershed
moments in English history, going from rural idyll to industrial revolution,
through two world wars and onto the present day. Thompson introducing drums,
electric guitars, soul singers, even hip-hop to the orchestral mix. Some of
those themes also appeared in the London Olympic Games opening ceremony a decade
later, something Shirley Thompson was upset about because she felt she should
have been included. Susanna Reesbourne. She was the first woman to compose and
conduct a symphony in the last 40 years in the UK. Thompson's younger brother
Richard, my now a photographer, was involved too, taking shots of the recording
session for the cover of what would become his sister's debut album release. It
was then and only then I realised that that was my sister conducting the Royal
Philharmonic Orchestra and kind of taking it in the stride. I experienced
goosebumps, I had to take a minute and I realised that this was a special
person. For me, it was a really proud moment. Her works have now been performed
all over the world. Push, the award-winning ballet she co-scored in 2005, toured
for 15 years, staged in more than 40 different countries. She's written works
about Barack Obama, Nelson Mandela, as well as the abolition of the slave trade.
In the sort of narrower, more traditional world of classical music, I do think
her music isn't as recognised as perhaps it should be. There are still some
people who work in classical music who have quite a limited view of what a
composer should look and sound like. So it's race and gender. In 2018, to mark
the 70th anniversary of the docking of the Empire Windrush, Thompson was
commissioned to compose a new anthem which was performed at a special service in
Westminster Abbey. She's really wanted to celebrate her parents' experience and
I think she did that wonderfully well. These kind of stories are not the ones we
normally hear in a classical music concert. The following year, she was awarded
an OBE for her services to music, though establishment recognition wasn't going
to mellow her music's message. 2021's Song of the Prophets was about the global
impact of climate change, breathe, inspired by the Black Lives Matter movement.
A lot of the projects that she's done, she's effectively made them happen on her
own, so she's not only composed them, but she's produced them, she's put the
films together. That means it's a staggering amount of work to do all of that.
What little downtime she gets. She likes to watch Mr Bean and Mr Fed. Absolutely
loves tennis and is a big Roger Federer fan. We've queued up outside Wimbledon
many years ago and one year we queued, I think, for seven hours, managed to get
in CN hours tennis and then that was the end of play. She's pretty au fait with
football too, by the sound of things. Commissioned by UEFA last year to write
two pieces for the Women's Euros, including the world's first concerto for
footballers and orchestra, which featured a score recorded by the Royal
Philharmonic Orchestra as well as a choreographed routine of ball skills. I'm
rather Richard impressed. I thought the Euros last year, you know, I thought
that was a big deal. Only to be trumped now by King Charles' latest invite.
Shirley J. Thompson, one of 12 composers he's personally handpicked to compose
music for his coronation on May the 6th. So what does Susanna Eastburne think
we'll get? I would be surprised if she did something kind of really serious and
formal. I imagine it will be very celebratory. She's done things for the Royal
Family before so I think they'll be kind of warmth in it as well. I'm beyond
excited, she tweeted this week, Shirley Thompson, an astute, joysed by the new
King, thinks her close friend, Joan St John. She encompasses so many different
aspects of life in the UK in the 21st century and she stands out there by
herself and I think she will be one of the ideal people to contribute to this.
Profile was presented by Mark Coles. The producer was Sally Abrahams. Radio 4's
Lent Talks for 2023. Mark's reflective moments taking inspiration from the
Lord's Prayer with meditations on forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on
earth. A collection of personal stories from the man who forgave his brother's
killers to the writer escaping a war zone to facing despair but finding hope.
Sharing experiences on faith, humanity and how the words of the Lord's Prayer
have impacted people's lives. Lent Talks. begins this Wednesday evening at 8.45
on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4 it's time to join those infinite
monkeys. Hello I'm Brian Cox. I'm Robin Inks. And this is the Infinite Monkey
Web, our final Australian show for now. Actually might be our final show ever
because there's a high chance things will go horribly wrong. There's not a high
chance, right, this is fantastic. It's my favourite thing of actually seeing
Brian scared of something. Because he's not normally scared, right, as you know
Brian is an adventurer, he's the kind of person who likes going fast, he likes
flying high, he likes getting drunk in South American Amazonian jungles with
pirates and a lot of that was not kept in the show for various reasons. Is that
it? Yeah. Alcohol, criminality and then it went really crazy didn't it when you
started putting on that eye patch. But anyway so we have now found that there is
one Achilles heel that Brian has and of course it's a lovely Achilles heel I
should say. It's much smoother than mine, it's a beautiful heel. He works that
heel out. It is a muscular heel but nevertheless it is his Achilles heel and
that heel is the Achilles heel of spiders. I'm not a fan. For British people in
particular, everyone when they go to Australia always shake your shoes out
because you never know there's probably a poisonous spider in your shoe. Never
sit on the toilet, there's always something hiding in the toilet. Brian hasn't
gone for three and a half weeks, right. So the front row this could be quite a
waterfall. Every time it nearly gets in, hang on a minute, the funnel web's
coming from my bits. The funnel web's coming from my bits. Coming from my bits.
Today we are exploring the reality of spiders. Should we be scared of spiders or
should they be scared of us? How many species of spiders are there, how do they
behave in the wild and how do we study spiders in their natural habitat? And of
course most importantly will a bite from an irradiated spider really give you
super powers but at the same time leave to thwarted teenage love. We should do
that. I think now the infinite monkey cage has reached the point where it needs
to be part of the Marvel universe. And Dick Cumberbatch can play you. He'd be
good, wouldn't Dick Cumberbatch would be a good you and I could be played by a
piece of sponge. In a cardigan, yeah. Today we are joined by three humans and
several spiders. We'll let the spiders introduce themselves later on but our
humans are a professor of ecology, a professor of ecological behaviour and a
cake expert who has studied the psychology of Kylie Minogue. And they are. Oh
hello, hi. I'm Mariella Hoeberstein. I am a behavioural ecologist, evolutionary
biologist at Macquarie University. I have personal fears and professional fears.
My personal fear swimming in the sea in Sydney is of course sharks.
Professionally, I think I have to watch out in field work particularly for
snakes and crocodiles when we go up north and it is often a difficult job to
explain to my colleagues and also my students that the crocodiles are really
everywhere and they have to watch out. I'm Deeta Hochulai from the University of
Sydney. I'm an ecologist. I study insects and spiders and bats and birds and
plants and humans in cities. I'm interested in how nature survives and even
thrives in cities. In terms of animals I'm scared of, I'm actually, the
saltwater crocodiles are the things that probably scare me the most. You know,
they're one of those few animals that if they kill you, they're actually doing
it deliberately because they think you're food. They actually look at us and
say, yeah, I could eat that. Yeah, so saltwater crocodiles, it's very hard to go
near a puddle after you've been up in the top end for a while. I'm Claire
Hoeber. I'm a comedian and as of about 10 seconds ago, my most feared animal is
a crocodile. Never occurred to me before but I'll be taking that home with me
tonight. And this is our panel. Now what worries me is that you said that, you
know, they look at us and they see food and my anxiety would not be that I'd be
eaten by a saltwater crocodile, but it would reject me. Send you back. No,
there's another swimmer over there whose legs are more delicious. Your ex-mas
rather put me off. The ex-mas made of 36 different herbs and spices. Anyway,
it's funny you should say that there's a crock-wise program in the top end in
the Northern Territory and the basic advice to locals is basically try not to
look like crocodile food. Stay away from the water. Don't put your fish or clean
your fish near the water. It's actually reasonably straightforward to avoid
being eaten. Is there a way of, I mean, when you say don't look like crocodile
food, is there also some cosplay that we can do kind of around that? You can,
but it won't help with the crocodile thing. Just a quick question. Is it too
late to change the topic? Oh, don't think there have not been whole shows which
started off being about something like lightning and ended up being about
tadpoles or anything like that. That is, I believe it's Mariela. I said, have
you heard any episodes? She went, yes, it very much seemed like a kind of form
of organised chaos and now what you've realised is the organisation comes in the
edit. The chaos is what is handed over to our producer. I can bring it back to
her. Mariela, how many species of spiders are there? So right now we've probably
identified about 50,000 worldwide. 50. 50, yes. So they're quite diverse and
lots of them. Australia is magnificent for spiders. There's lots of them.
They're colourful, they're large, they're everywhere. It's a dream. What are the
smallest spiders? What are the largest spiders? The most venomous spiders. Okay.
All right, Spider Olympics. All spiders are venomous. The question is how does
the venom affect you, your species, humans and you personally? So the bad news
is we all individually could have anaphylactic shock to the protein, so similar
to bees. So some of us would react really badly to a spider bite. In Australia,
there are really only two species that are associated with death, the funnel-
wiped spider, and there you really have to go and get a vaccine. But the last
death was in 1978 or something like this. Since then we have anti-vaccines
everywhere. And the good thing is you won't miss it, the bite. It's very, very
painful. So you won't overlook, you won't go, oh, I missed that and I'm going to
die. It's nothing nice to know a scientist say. The good news is it's agony from
the outset. It really is. Very, very painful. And the second one is red-backed
spiders. And that's not absolutely deadly. The venom is a chemical that
interferes with heart rate and breathing. People that have problems with the
heart or small kids or very old people, they may get into trouble. But healthy
people, young people, it's a bit like COVID, isn't it? They are also very, very
painful. Yes, painful. But red-backed spiders are lovely. They really are
lovely, lovely, lovely spiders. Very gentle. You said you were bitten in thumb
by what spider was that? And can you tell us a little bit about the experience?
For the radio viewers, Mariela is demonstrating her thumb. So I was in the field
and I was looking at a spider that twirls a leaf in the web. And Sydney
scientists may have seen this as a web and in the middle is a twirled leaf. And
I was looking for males that cohabit with female in the leaf. And so I was
breaking open the leaf. So there was a female in there, but not the male. And I
looked away and the females, very upset with me, jumped on my left thumb and bit
my thumb. And it was an immediate pain, like a bee sting. And then I could feel
the venom move up my arm, this painful pull up my arm to about my armpit. And
then it stopped. And so, you know, I did the usual field of the report for the
university. Is that like the medical advice that you get? It's not the first
thing you do, is it? Feel out the report. I still have and I'm happy to show
everyone who is interested a scar on my thumb from this bite from many, many
years ago. It was the only bite I've ever had throughout my entire career
working with spiders. So now we've opened up this scene from Jaws. Dieter, it's
your chance to say what scar you've got. Mine are mainly emotional, but when
Mariela mentioned that, I thought the chill that went down my spine was the
paperwork. And it was just, I mean, Mariela's also pointed out one of those
really interesting stories about our killer spiders. And that's just that very
few of them have a decent body count. Very few people have been killed by
spiders and the reputation that Brian and Robin have been attracted here to
probably isn't deserved. I mean, we've got a bunch of spiders that aren't doing
what they should, apparently. You're right, Claire, we do need to change the
subject of the show. We will promise death and mutilation and it appears we're
just going to be given fascination. Well, it's plenty of death and mutilation,
but it's the spiders doing it to other animals, all the spiders being mutilated.
But it's as marvellous giant orange wasp that's quite busy around this time of
year in Sydney. She spends her time looking for huntsman spiders to go and catch
and she'll sting it and paralyse it and then she'll drag it to a hole or a spot
and stash it, lay a single legged inside the living but paralyzed spider. Her
baby, the baby wasp, the larva will then grow inside the life but paralyzed
spider until it's eaten all the non-essential bits. And then it'll spin a little
cocoon and pop out. It's, I mean, nature's beautiful. I was going to say my
little brother got bitten by a red-back spider when he was three. It had
floaties on in the swimming pool and there was a red-back on the floaty and my
mum couldn't grab him in time and it bit him on the ear and he wasn't happy
about it. But yeah, he was fine. I mean, you know, like you said, they were
friendly. Maybe it was just a little bite. Maybe it didn't. Can I ask about why
these particular spiders are so venomous? Because there clearly needs to be a
reason why that venom evolved in that way and it can really mobilize or
essentially kill something as large as a human being. What's the point for a
funnel-web spider? So I did some research before I went onto this panel because
I thought maybe this is going to be a question. There was actually a paper. I
like the fact you've given away, you're not an expert on spiders at all. The
real Mariela is somebody going, help me, help me. And by the own webs that
you've made. This paper that I read was saying that yes, funnel webs and their
venom is against vertebrate predators because they're a decent meal for a little
rodent type thing. But the fact that humans react so violently against the venom
is really a coincidence. This venom is not for us. It's not meant for us. And
there's other vertebrates that it doesn't really work on either. I mean, dogs
get upset and it's painful, but they don't die like humans. So the effect on
humans is quite coincidental. The British perspective has always been, I think
since Billy Connolly did a routine about funnel webs, that seems to make you.
But there was this, when people come here for the first time, this perpetual
sense of kind of anxiety around. Does any of that actually exist when you live
here? Robin, foreigners coming here are so afraid of the deadly spiders. People
that live here are just afraid of foreigners coming here. I don't know if this
is everyone's experience, but growing up, my father made sure we weren't afraid
of spiders. But you know, if there was a huntsman in the corner of our bedroom,
he would get rid of it. But he put it on his arm and he let us look close up. We
didn't generally accept it on our own arms. But I really appreciate that he did
that because now in my household, I'm the person that takes the spider out.
There has to be one in every house. You don't always want the job, but if no one
else will do it. So yeah, I'm not afraid of spiders. Somehow though, I haven't
been able to pass that on to my own kids. I now have two little kids who are
terrified of spiders, which either means I have not shown them enough or I've
shown them too many. I'm not sure. Oh, Dita, I just I mean, I may regret asking
you this, but we're inside right now in a big venue with like a couple of
hundred people. How many spiders are close to us right now? People have actually
tried to estimate how many spiders exist per square meter in the wild. And this
is Googling I did. I'm on Wikipedia, so I think it's true. People are talking
about in the wild, you get hundreds of spiders per square meter because you
know, they're not all big and there's a lot of them that are living vertically
as well. But there's probably about 80 per row. I'm just kidding. I made that
up. Do you know what? Right. You're allowed to. Claire was saying that due to
the spider bravery gene being possibly a recessive one, her children don't have
it. And I just wondered, what do we know about why people seem to have? I would
say it is an irrational fear because it's very rarely because someone has
actually got a story of, you know, and that's how I lost my arm or whatever. You
were going to get the part in the Fonz the musical and then that thumb damage it
was all over and done with because in the UK, there aren't deadly spiders. And
yet if a spider, you know, is in a bath or something like that, there will
always be people who are kind of screaming or jumping up on chairs. So I think
there's sort of two types of explanations, probably sort of the in between. One
is there is an evolutionary basis for it. A fear of spiders and snakes because
they can be dangerous for humans. And the other one is really a social
hypothesis where, Claire, you tried really hard with the kids to be calm, but
they may have observed other children, other adults freaking out about spiders
and they just pick it up like this and just perpetuate it. So I can't dismiss
the fact that there could be a selective benefit and evolutionary basis that it
is good to be a bit startled by snakes and by spiders. But I think that most of
the behavior we see is really copying other people. Is there a component of the
fact that they have a strange body plan? They're very, very different to us.
Could you outline the basic body plan just briefly of a spider? You talk about
the segments and the describe a spider. You're clear. You're clear. You start
and then, Dieter, you come in when you feel it might be necessary or not. That's
a real good test, isn't it? You start. When you say something about the little
legs, I'll clear up any of your messes up. Thank you, Claire. Well, the biggest
split is probably the front, the head and the second part, which is sort of an
abdomen or opusoma. Essentially, basically, I've got a lot of the legs and the
eyes are all in the front part and the abdomen, which is there for storing a lot
of the food and the fat and producing the silk is in the second part. They've
got a couple of different sets of mouth parts that starts off with a pair of
pretty bitey choppers or... I can see Mary Ellen switching. Yeah, sorry. Bitey
choppers. The next things are probably a thing called petty pups and they're
really fascinating. They've ever seen a spider with what looks like a sort of a
leg with two big sort of boxing gloves on it. It's going to be a male because
they're adapted for him to help transfer sperm. Then they've got the eight legs
and that's sort of the main part of the first part of the body. Can I ask a
question? I'm not proud, but somebody has to. If a spider has eight legs and
eight eyes, how many penises does it have? Two. I knew it was worth asking. It's
zero and two. They don't have a penis. They have a genital opening. They
ejaculate the sperm out of the genital opening onto a web. Males build a tiny
little sperm web. They ejaculate onto the sperm web and then they dip their
little petty pups, their first pair of legs into the droplet of sperm. They take
up the sperm into their legs. Then they search for a female. Then they insert
one of their little legs into the female genital opening. They ejaculate again.
If they're lucky, they get to do it again with the other leg. Hang on a minute.
Just to check that I've got the order right, they ejaculate and then they find a
female. Yes. And then it's the left leg in and the left leg out. Sometimes they
shake it all about, little spiderlings everywhere. So, absolutely fine. And then
after all that, they get eaten. So, in many species he's eaten, maybe even after
the first mating already, in after first copulation he's already eaten. Some of
the families, he also breaks off bits of his bits that get stuck inside the
female and it prevents other males from accessing that opening. Wow, he plugs
the hole. Yes. And that's what it's called, genital plugging. So, that is the
official term, well done Claire. Cool. Well, I've got some big ideas to take
home now. Do you think if the spider waited until she'd just eaten, he might get
away with it? Do you know, like is she eating him because she's hungry or? No,
because they're tiny. They're just an hors d'oeuvre. Just a little snack. So,
they're not substantive. So, it's not about satiation, not about hunger,
although hungry females are quite grumpy. I like to tell my husband he's just an
entree. This is my favourite thing, is watching Brian try to recover from this.
So, I'm thoroughly enjoying that. So, why then? Why do they do it? There's
different stories for different species, so it's not a universal explanation. In
redback spiders, males encourage to be cannibalised. When the male inserts one
of his little legs, he somersaults into the mouth parts of the female. And only
then does she start nibbling on him. If he doesn't do the somersault, she
doesn't eat him. And the advantage to the male is, if she eats him, she prefers
his sperm over the sperm of another male and fertilises her eggs with his sperm.
So that's one story. It's marvellously harmonious. The other more aggressive
story is with the San Andreas cross spider, for example, or Adita, you've worked
with the golden orb web spider. It's much more about, I think, female control
over mating and copulation, where females can stop copulation and therefore
control how much sperm they receive from a male, just by cutting off that head-
enough, I'll eat you instead. I'm done. Thank you. Yeah, let's wrap this up,
sort of thing. But I think Claire, you said something really, really clever
about, but what if she's eating? In fact, males wait in the wings for the female
to catch a big piece of prey, then she's busy wrapping it up, and then they just
rush to the female, jump on her, quickly, quickly inseminate her to then escape
without... Because she's busy dealing with something else. This is very
exciting, by the way. The programme is going to be available on the radio as a
podcast and also as a fever dream. Is there anything you'd like to add, Dieter?
I think the message from watching Spider Sex is don't try this at home. You
talked about already some quite complex behaviour, let's put it that way with
spiders. Of course, webs are the thing that most people think about when you
think of spiders, also very complex. So how intelligent are spiders? They are
probably more intelligent than we appreciate them to be and have better
cognition than we think they are. What they don't do is they don't wait on your
ceiling until you fall asleep and abseil into your mouth. So that's not what
they do. But they are good problem solvers. There's a very famous jumping spider
by the name of Portia, and she can detour, she can work out escape routes, she
can really perform really complex tasks. This is a specific individual. The
species is called Portia. You thought that was going to be our special guest.
Please welcome Portia all the way from that eve over there in Portia. So this is
really problem solving behaviour. There's also learning, so with learning
meaning taking an experience and learning from the experience they can learn to
build better webs, for example. So many of you walk through your garden and
there's a spider web and you keep on walking through the web. Spiders actually
learn that there's always damage on the right hand side and so they start
shifting to the left hand side. So that's a sign of learning. Thinking of webs,
I remember seeing some research that was done where giving spiders different
kind of things like coffee and cocaine and LSD. Yes, I saw those pictures. And
then seeing the kind of webs that they make. And I wonder what we can imagine
for seeing that process. You can see them online. It's absolutely amazing, the
different kind of stimulants, et cetera, that you can give to a spider and how
it will affect their webs. It's like the caffeinated spider making its webs
super quickly. The caffeinated one was one of the worst webs, wasn't it? Do you
remember? That was the surprise to me, that the LSD spider did better than the
coffee spider. Yeah. The coffee spider said, I've done the web. You've only done
a web at all. I've always said that, but I'm really great at doing webs. How
much about that LSD spider? I'm fine. I'm just doing the web. I'm going to start
a business doing webs, actually. And I'm going to do heaps of webs and have a
really, I'm going to have eight employees doing my webs. When we talk about
learning, the other thing is that they're really good at doing is finding
profitable places to build those webs. So even though we've just bagged them out
for being a bit thick compared to the other spiders, they are good at finding
good places to build. If you've got a light outside, you'll often find spiders.
So now let's get this To be fair, we were talking about speeders as well. We
were talking about speeder spiders. So you're allowed to talk about that. Speedy
spiders. Yeah. I mean, Marielle's point about those ground dwelling spiders with
the big eyes, big forward facing eyes, being super smart is a really fantastic
thing. If you've got a jumping spider at home, spend some time hanging out with
it and watching it. It will be there watching you. It will literally walk across
your table, turn and look at you and then keep walking. They're incredibly
engaging little dudes and girls. And you said, Marielle, those are you. So they
exhibit something that looks like REM sleep. Yeah, a researcher in Germany had
very recently just discovered this. So all animals sleep or have some sort of
sleep state. And she watched that the little jumping spiders were actually
suspending themselves on the threat at night. And then as she kept them watching
them, they started twitching like your puppy or your cat twitches in sleep. And
then she filmed that. And so there were sort of uncontrolled twitches, also the
spinnerets twitching. And then when she filmed the eyes, she could see that the
eyes were moving as well in some uncoordinated way. So very reminiscent to REM
sleep. So, you know, the question is, are they REM sleeping? And if they're REM
sleeping, like us, are they dreaming? And what might a spider be dreaming?
Wonderful idea that a spider can dream potentially, I mean, speculative, as you
said. We have some spiders, actually, we have some samples. Well, they're not
samples. They're living spiders. Oh, wow. That is actually not in a box. Hang
on. Brian, do you want to swap seats? I've been assured. To be fair, Brian, it
is in a box. It's just that the box is not fully closed. So we have a very large
spider in a very large web. That's not large. To me, it's large. I'm sorry, I
came over all crocodile Dundee there. That's not a large spider. So this is a
St. Andrews cross spider. This particular one is from Queensland, which we
collected whilst looking out for crocodiles with great care. And she's built an
orb web inside a frame that we have in the lab. So this is how we get a three
dimensional frame. It's about 10 centimetres wide and 30 by 30 centimetres in
width and in length. And the moment she builds the web, she's actually quite
happy on the web and she can see she's quite calm and so on. I've also brought a
male. He's tiny. He's very much smaller than her. I'm just going to put him here
at the bottom of the web. We'll see what he does when he'll start climbing up on
the web and start courting. It is a bit late for them. So maybe he will, maybe
he won't. Sometimes it's just better to watch a TV show and go to sleep, isn't
it? Well, he's now come out of his jar and he's having a look around and he's
got sensors in his legs so he can taste the silk and it gives him information
about the female. And if he's interested, he'll move into the web and into the
hub with the female. He'll nibble her legs a little bit, court her, create some
vibrations and maybe... And then will he do all the things that you described?
What is his fate if he does that? I think a 50% chance that he'll survive the
first meeting. Good odds. It feels really sinister to watch. Could you just
describe? I get paid for that. Literally, they pay me to watch them. No, I'm
serious. I mean, nobody ever told me that was a career option when I was a
school. So what species was that again? So the species is called Agiope. They're
beautiful. They have a stripey back, yellow and white stripes, very gentle
spiders, never bitten me. So I've worked with them for many years. You had that
just under the table you sat at there. And has she remained in exactly that
position? How certain can you be? So she will remain there until the lights go
off and she... Whoever is in charge... I've got 50 pounds over there. Let's see
how much we've got over there. When she rebuilds her web, which is sort of at
night or early morning, that's when she starts moving around and that's where
she explores and she'll come out of the cage, of course, and she'll find...
Dieter said, you know, they're good at finding spots. And so she may just, you
know, come out of the cage and find another spot. Well, it's not exactly a cage,
is it? You brought some other spiders as well. We'll keep you updated for the
listeners at home on what the fate of that... I brought some Huntsman spiders.
So yeah. So who's a fan? Let's find out who loves Huntsman. Who's a little bit
more edgy with a Huntsman? No, that's good overall. I think they're very much
accepted. Yes. There are two types. They're solitary Huntsman. They don't like
to hang out with other Huntsman. And then there are social ones and they form
little social bonds, groups, and they hang out together, they hunt together,
they sit on the bark together. I read recently if a Huntsman bites you, you are
meant to... Hang on, let me get the phrasing right. In-calm to stop the spread
of venom. And I thought that that was a very ambitious suggestion. I have to be
honest, Huntsman, they are pretty... They spook me as well because they're so
erratic in their movements. Sorry, they're erratic in their movements. Yeah,
yeah, yeah. They're just scuttlers. To describe a Huntsman, so these are... What
about the size of my thumb in total, I would say, but how large can a Huntsman
get? So these are juveniles, they're about maybe five to six, seven centimeters
long. The adults can get quite big, maybe a span of 20 centimeters. And the
females really big, big, big bottoms. Like really nice and fat. Lots of eggs
inside and then she, of course, lays a cocoon and then she'll hang on to the
cocoon and the little babies hatch and then they stay with mum. They stay with
mum for weeks. The social ones never leave mum. The solitary ones eventually go
away and leave mum. Again, it's surprising behavior. It goes back to some kind
of intelligence again, doesn't it? At the moment you say family group, kind of
have a sense... And parental care is a really interesting thing in spiders
because there's a fantastic group called the wolf spiders or the lycosids where
the babies or the spiderlings will be there on the back of the mother. She'll
walk around with them. She hasn't got a web. She's relatively free living and
it's just an amazing sight to see a mother spider and these are really dramatic
spiders, the wolf spiders. They're a spider with their forward facing eyes,
their hunters and in the bush at night you can actually go spotlighting for them
where you'll point your torch at them and you'll see thousands of little eyes
reflecting back at you because you just... It's really quite magical, I know.
I'm trying to be serious. It's kind of like staring up into the stars and seeing
everything glittering, which some people are very fond of. You're looking at the
ground and you literally have hundreds of animals, so thousands of eyes staring
back at you. It's a really exquisite thing to look at. It's a really special
moment. But in terms of parental care, there's a lot of different models I think
in the spider work. Some of it's not very caring at all, but obviously some of
these animals do a fair bit of work. And some of the babies eat the mum in the
end. That happens as well. She sacrifices herself to her babies. Claire, you
were going to... A moment ago you looked like you had something you were about
to say, but now you've heard about the cannibalisation. Certainly everything's
changed. That was a nice Mother's Day card, isn't it? I think that's why animals
can't be conscious, most animals. Because if you knew the destiny that you had,
so I give birth, you give birth and then you just remain there. You don't go
anywhere. It's like certain forms are kind of octopus, things like that. You
just stay under that bit of rock and your children grow bigger and bigger and
bigger and you kind of start to rot and then they eat you and then they leave.
And you'd go, nope. Do you want to have kids? No, no, no, no. I'm just going to
stay a happy, Disney-fied octopus. Hang on. Now, do you have kids, Robin? Yeah.
One. Because that means that even if they do start to cannibalise me, it'll take
them a long time. Have they had more... Always thinking about a cannibalism
issue. I'm so sorry, but I just think human parenthood's exactly the same. If
somebody explained it to you clearly, you would absolutely not do it. So let me
get this straight. It'll cost approximately $10,000 more and you won't sleep
ever again and you won't go out at night and also they'll hate you. Yes. Like,
do you know what? I don't think the spider version of parenthood sounds that
much worse. And then we should check in terms of when your children were
conceived. How far away was that from the previous story we were told? Do all
spiders molt? Because I only found this out really recently that they... Do all
of them... I just... So they don't grow. They just shed a skin and then they're
bigger. I just... When I think about trying to wriggle out of a tight pair of
pants and then imagine that pair of pants has eight legs, I'm just... How do
they get out of those eight trousers and they're bigger? Four trousers, wouldn't
it? Yeah. Sorry, of course. That's why we have him here. He is very good at
maths. So they can only grow by molting. So because they have an exoskeleton, a
hard shell on the outside. So... Oh, forget the pants. It's on. So the male has
moved up the web and he's now in the hub of the female. So she's not aggressive
at this stage. Oh, hang on, there's a twitch. Yeah, that's him. He's twitching.
All the under twelves must leave. He's going to do a few vibrations. He's going
to tug a little bit on the silk. Mariela, can I please be the godparent of the
babies? Yes. 300 little eggs. There's quite a... So, well, you need to do a kind
of a sports commentary on this. Yes. I'm happy to do it. It may take a few
hours. Are you OK with that? We've got enough drinks at the bar for that. So we
were talking about the exoskeleton. How do they get it off and how are they
bigger when it's off? So there's a chemical reaction that softens the
exoskeleton from the inside out. And so you get a crack in the exoskeleton.
What's under the exoskeleton is quite soft. And so they kind of slowly just pull
themselves out. They're still suspended on a piece of silk. And then they're
super, super soft. But then they use the hydraulics to expand. That's the
growth. And then they're waiting in this expanded state. So you can really see
them just stretch out the legs. And then the exoskeleton hardens. And that's
when they've stretched their legs. Have you watched that? Yes, yes, yes. How
long does it take? Oh, it does take a while. Yeah. Life is a spot. It's, I
think, pretty crap. A lot of things are trying to eat you all the time. Marielle
just mentioned that she's going to have 300 babies. But you can guarantee that
an overwhelming majority of her kids aren't going to make it. You know,
because... Love me, the spider. I'm sorry. Yeah. Sorry. Marielle hasn't had her
genital plugging yet tonight. I'm so sorry. Cut that. Please, don't, that won't
make the podcast. I'm so sorry. Now, you see, if we cut the earlier bit, that's
going to be a really interesting moment. Hang me out to dry. I just wanted to
ask about that, the ecological niche that spiders inhabit. Because we hear that,
for example, you often hear it said, well, wasps, we could do without wasps.
They're pollinators, for example, that the world without wasps would be a much
worse world. In terms of spiders, what ecological niche are they operating
within? They're predators and they're voracious predators, particularly of a lot
of other insects. And one of the reasons I think so many of you were supportive
of the huntsmen is you know that they're in your homes, happily chomping on the
cockroaches you might not want to have at home. Their role as predators is
really significant, but they're probably what people like to call mesopredators,
where they're sort of, they're not the top predator, so there are things that
are trying to eat them while they're trying to eat other things. So there's a
really interesting, I suppose, chain of events that comes with their ecology. So
losing a spider, you know, there are potential cascades and the like that could
happen where if you lost the spiders, you might get an increase in numbers of
their prey items. But I think, I mean, it's always a really difficult
conversation because people say, what's the use of this animal? What's the use
of that animal? You know, what's the use of anything? I mean, the reason we want
to keep these things, they really enrich our lives. And I think that's one of
the things that's really important. A lot of these animals do an enormous
amount. Your pollinators, your parasitoids, your spiders, and they're going
about their business doing it. But this notion of people saying, was it kill it
with fire and stuff like that? I'm a big fan of live and let live. And our
spiders have clearly got a reputation for being deadly when they haven't killed
that many people. It means that we should really sort of celebrate them a little
bit more. I reckon. APPLAUSE That is one fact that we haven't got to yet, which
is the deadliness of the huntsman. A situation where a huntsman can be deadly
is, of course, the huntsman in the car. And... Freaking out the driver, causing
accidents, and just before this show, I was looking at all the news articles
about that, exactly that storyline, including where people are injured and
killed, because of the accident they caused. I had one on a visor once, on the
Sun Visor, flipped it down while I was driving. Yeah, it was intense, but... I
mean, I kept my calm. I just, like, I made a really long noise for the whole
time it took me to gently guide my car to the side of the road. And then I was
like, Ned, new car. LAUGHTER But it was... Cos we did a sound check earlier
where you did use the scream. So can we just have a little sound for that long
noise? You know, like, obviously, if a spider takes you by surprise and you can
get away from it, then it's a... BOO! Right? You know, like, the noise that your
mum makes, right? If she's not expecting you to come in, right? BOO! Right, that
one. But if it's in the car, then it's a long one, so it's like... Cos you can't
jump away from it, so you put the Sun Visor down, there's the huntsman, you just
go... HE SINGS HUMS..for the whole time until you're out of the car. And then
when you're out of the car, you kind of go... HE SIGHS..like that. Don't you?
Isn't that what everyone does? LAUGHTER Brilliant. How's it going over there?
We'll have a quick last report. I think he's changed his mind. He's just sitting
there. Very wise. He's not feeling it. No. It's his choice. Yeah. That she's not
going to do anything at the moment she's sat in the middle of the web, she's
going to stay there. Yeah. So it's his choice to proceed and... He spins a
mating thread and suspends himself and then strings the mating thread, not
unlike a guitar. And then it is her choice to move on to the mating thread and
she has to hang at a particular angle, otherwise his legs won't reach. And then
he'll take a run-up and... LAUGHTER No. Yeah. LAUGHTER And... And insert a leg.
LAUGHTER LAUGHTER APPLAUSE I was looking to Claire for a comment and you seemed
speechless. As if there's anything I can say off the back of that, except, wow,
that's a long birds in the bees chat for those spider kids. Thank you very much
to our fantastic panel there, Mary LaHerberstein, Detalkley and Claire Hooper.
We asked our audience a question too, and it was, what makes you jump most if
you found it in the bath? So what would make you jump most if you found it in
the bath? Petros just started with my ex-wife. LAUGHTER Though I like the way
you've spelled X there, with just one, not EX, just X, to suggest that, again,
still in the Marvel universe there. Gordon said, Robin in Sea Wincy Spider.
Someone had to do it. Very good. Schrodinger's cat wearing one of Robin's
cardigans. LAUGHTER It's delivery, Brian, it's delivery. Let's go back again to
your delivery. Show Brian how to deliver. Oh, OK, that's a bit too much
pressure. Also, there is certainly more value in a joke when it hasn't been
heard before, but I'll give it a go. What would make you jump most if you found
it in your bath? Schrodinger's cat wearing one of Robin's cardigans. LAUGHTER
You'll notice there was a tonal change there, Brian. Your perpetual... Just
didn't sell it. My teenage son, who'd be least expected to be there. LAUGHTER
Rubber duck quarking. LAUGHTER So, thank you very much for those. Thank you very
much. This is the last show for the time being that we're doing in Australia,
and I hope we're going to be back to do more shows here. You've been a fantastic
audience, and brilliant panels as well. And we don't actually know at the time
of recording, we don't know what next week's episode is going to be, but we do
know that it won't be about nature, because Brian gets very cross, don't you, if
we do too many things about living things, because you don't understand them. So
it'll be... Imagine... Some cold, cold, different bit of the universe. Claire,
have you got...? No, I was just going to say, imagine if Brian Cox spun away,
but it would be a perfect grid. LAUGHTER And with that, goodbye. Goodbye.
CHEERING AND APPLAUSE In the Infinite Monkey Cage Without your trousers In the
Infinite Monkey Cage Do you know now, now, again? The Infinite Monkey Cage was
presented by Brian Cox and Robin Ince. The producer was Caroline Steele. It is a
BBC Studios production. And you can hear all the episodes from the current
series on BBC Sounds now. And I can shed some light on next week's programme.
The boys will be discovering the clever life hacks mathematicians use to solve
everyday problems. That's next Saturday evening at a quarter past seven. Next
tonight on Radio 4, the poet and dramatist Michael Simmons-Roberts will be
celebrating the art of the radio play. Lem Sisay is a one-off. Are you the poet?
A woman said to me in the street. Lem Sisay isn't anyone else. Now I can say,
she said, that I finally met Benjamin Zephaniah. Lem Sisay explores uniqueness.
You are a visible, original, apenical of miracle. We're talking about being the
one and only non-graduate in the room. You just said you failed. You are the
Lord Mayor of Manchester. Yeah! Lem Sisay is the one and only. Are you that
poet, Tony Walsh? On Friday mornings at 11.30 on Radio 4 and...