TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 sibling or best friend is going through something terrible. Twins Chloe and
Lydia share their story with Hayley Hassell. BBC News at 10 o'clock President
Vladimir Zelensky has said Ukraine will do everything to achieve a victory this
year as he marked the first anniversary of the full-scale Russian invasion of
his country. Mr Zelensky used a special address to say Ukraine had inspired and
unified the world in its resistance and would not stop until those he called
Russian murderers had faced punishment. He said the war so far had been hard on
Ukrainians. We will defeat all threats, shelling, bombs, missiles, kamikaze
drones, blackouts, cold. We are stronger than all of this. Russia's former
president Dmitry Medvedev, who is now the deputy chairman of Russia's Security
Council, has suggested the only way for Moscow to ensure a lasting peace with
Ukraine was to expand its own borders as far as possible. Police in Northern
Ireland have arrested a fourth man in connection with the shooting of an off-
duty police officer in Olma on Wednesday. Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell suffered life-changing injuries in the attack and remains in hospital.
The owner of British Airways, IAG, has returned to profit for the first time
since the pandemic. The company made an operating profit of £1.1 billion last
year, compared with a loss of more than £2.6 billion in 2021. Criminals
convicted of serious crimes could be given longer jail terms if they refused to
appear in court for sentencing. The Justice Secretary Dominic Raab said victims
and their families deserved to see the perpetrators in the dock. Mr Raab made
the comments while meeting the family of Zara Alina, whose killer chose not to
appear for his sentencing. And the poet laureate Simon Armitage has written a
poem to celebrate the centenary of the first journey made by the steam
locomotive Flying Scotsman. It went on to become the first of its kind to travel
non-stop from London to Edinburgh and the first to record a speed of 100 miles
an hour. BBC News Later this morning is psychiatry working? Some people in
difficulty, their families, psychologists, even psychiatrists themselves say
there are serious questions about the way psychiatry understands and treats some
people. More for you at 11 this morning. Now on Radio 4, it's Woman's Hour with
Hayley Hassell. Hello and welcome to the programme. It's a year since Russian
forces invaded Ukraine and you'll be hearing across the BBC and other outlets
today just what that year has been like for many Ukrainians who have been
displaced, families have been torn apart and those who are grieving the loss of
loved ones. But here on Woman's Hour we want to take a moment to delve into the
effects this war has had on the women of Ukraine, those who are now refugees or
those who have marched on the front lines as part of the Ukraine armed forces
that is made up of 22% of women and those women who are helping support the war
effort from a national level. Like my guest Dayma Linda Simmons who is the UK's
ambassador to Ukraine and who will be giving Woman's Hour her only UK interview
on this anniversary. I'll be talking to her in just a moment. But yesterday we
talked about siblings and many of you contacted the programme with stories of
amazing support and comfort that you just couldn't get from anyone else but your
brother or sister. But what do you do when something amazing happens to you
whilst your closest ally is going through something terrible? When my next guest
Chloe was days away from giving birth, her twin sister had a miscarriage and
they'll be joining me today to talk about how that tested their bond to the
absolute limit. And as Woman's Hour is all about hearing your stories I'd love
you to join in this conversation. If you've had to cope with something tragic
whilst witnessing the joy of your nearest and dearest, maybe like my guests
you've had to support your friend through their pregnancy whilst you were unable
to conceive. Or maybe you've had to attend the wedding of a friend after you've
just gone through a break up. Or were you the one wracked with guilt for
celebrating when you knew that your sibling or your friend was hurting inside?
Well you can text the programme, the number is 84844, text will be charged at
your standard message rate. On social media we're at Woman's Hour and you can
email us through our website. Or you can send a WhatsApp message or voice note
using the number 03700 100 444. Data charges may apply depending on your
provider so you might want to use WiFi if you can. And terms and conditions can
be found on our website. And here on Woman's Hour we often battle against the
idea of women's work as a classification. But today I'll be joined by an art
historian and textile artist who is going to tell me all about the work of
quilting and how historically it has been seen as woman's art but is now making
a resurgence in feminist circles. But first to our top story today. The Russian
invasion of Ukraine on February 24th 2022 has created Europe's largest refugee
crisis since World War II. The war has severely impacted on social cohesion,
community security and the resilience of local communities, especially women and
girls. Approximately 4.5 million people have been displaced inside Ukraine with
8 million people registered as refugees across Europe. Now the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights recently verified more than
7000 civilian deaths but they say that the real numbers could be much higher.
Now currently best in Kiev, Dame Melinda Simmons has been the British ambassador
for Ukraine since September 2019. She joins me now. Welcome, Madam Ambassador.
Thank you for coming on the show. Thank you for having me this morning. Now
before I start I just wanted to play you a clip from Woman's Hour almost a year
ago now when just two weeks before you had had to temporarily leave Ukraine. I
wanted to play you this clip because the description of what you saw on your
journey that day is extremely powerful. Here it is. Well, I think all of us who
had to make the very tough decision to move from Lviv to the Polish border
couldn't be otherwise then speechlessly shocked really because you never expect,
nobody expects, not Ukrainians or us or anyone to be part of such a human exodus
out of a country that has lived peacefully to another country in such a kind of
basic sort of wartime way. We passed thousands of people, many of whom had left
their cars because the queues were so long and were walking and it was bitterly
cold. And of course, this is the case with many borders, it's quite exposed. And
so people were wrapping things around them that they had in their backpacks and
we were watching this long, long line of people make their way to the border.
And it was incredibly hard to process. We spent some time talking about it
together as a group after we crossed the border because we felt the need to put
words to what we had seen. And most of us talked about it as things that we
remembered reading about or hearing about from World War II, that the extent of
that exodus, that was the clearest picture we could come up with. So, Damon, it
is such a powerful image there. And I think you went on to say you held hands
with your colleague and you actually cried seeing that. What does it feel like
almost a year to be reminded of those first days of the war? Thank you for
asking. It's genuinely really horrible to think back to this time last year. It
was such a traumatic time for everybody. For me, for all my staff, those of us
who were evacuated, and particularly my Ukrainian colleagues who found
themselves fleeing. Actually, this morning I had a really lovely session with my
staff in which we encouraged each other to talk about what we were reflecting on
today. And most of us talked about how hard it was to think of that time. But we
also talked about the strength that we took from it, how we coped, what we had
learned. And most importantly of all, how differently we all felt now that we
were back. And I've characterized this myself as this time last year being
consumed with uncertainty. And I was certainly afraid. All of us were afraid at
that time. It was so impossible to tell what might happen, particularly to Kiev
to the capital. And this time we think of ourselves as people who are
determined, who feel like we're making a real contribution. And that's not just
actually stuff at the British Embassy in Kiev. That's people all over the
recently deoccupied, free places, of course, Kiev classifies itself as being
deoccupied, Russians having tried to get into Kiev, people going about their
work and opening up businesses and finding ways to contribute to the economy and
build their lives. All of that is characterized as a positive way to contribute
towards the defence of Ukraine. So how I feel now is really different from how I
felt a year ago. That difference I can tell in a lot of the things you tweet
about and a lot of the interviews you've done and that travel from fear to
determination. I mean, you've mentioned that you are now the eyes and ears of
Ukraine so that we and the rest of the world can really understand what it's
like that. But that must be incredibly difficult position for you. When you took
this job, you never imagined you'd be in the middle of a war zone. How is daily
life for you now and how are you and your colleagues coping with that? Well,
actually, the ambassador job is always busy. So being busy isn't different. The
difference leading an embassy through wartime is that the job stops being a job
and it becomes a life because war isn't a five day a week thing. And Russians
don't stop shelling Kiev at the weekends. They can go and have a rest. So the
uncertainty about how your daily life is going to be is a 24 seven thing. And
also talking with ministers, with officials or frankly with survivors or
witnesses or activists or people delivering humanitarian aid is also a round the
clock thing. So I think the biggest difference for me in terms of the work I do
is of course it's all geared towards the UK effort to support Ukraine to defend
itself. But it's relentless and the pressure of keeping your resilience going
through that relentlessness where you may not get the chance for the downtime.
And of course I'm separated from my family because they can't live with me here
while this war is going on. Those are probably on my main sources of pressure.
And of course, 90% of those who have fled the fighting are women and children.
What is daily life like for those women who have stayed? I know you go out and
meet them often. How are they coping? Well, of course, if they're in places like
Kiev or Lviv, largely if they're in the west of Ukraine, they may have more
carer responsibilities. And certainly for many of them whose partners have been
mobilized, they're now the main person in the household keeping things together.
That's like your daily life amplified with more uncertainty about your family.
If you're in a recently deoccupied place in Ukraine, if for example you're in
Sumi or Kharkiv or even Hassan, which is currently being shelled relentlessly,
then it's more about survival because there's so much less available to you,
less in terms of products that you can buy and obviously less in terms of work
that would generate income. If you are a woman who's living inside an occupied
part of Ukraine, for more than I'm able to hear, because of course I can't go
into Russian occupied parts of Ukraine, it is a nightmare, a nightmare that will
only be told through survivor testimony after those places are deoccupied. And
of course you mentioned the fact that there's no work, there's no supplies, but
what about the health care for women? I think it's something like 265,000
Ukrainian women were pregnant as the war broke out. And obviously hospitals have
been damaged along the way. What access to health support remains for women in
Ukraine? Well, it's important to remember that Ukraine is the second largest
country in Europe with a population of 40 million people. So wherever they were
displaced, whether they left for Poland or they were displaced, those were in
the country. The scale of the need in terms of how you had to look after women
who are pregnant has just risen exponentially. So that even for a functioning
government, which we have to remember Ukraine has with its departments
functioning and its ministers turning up for work and its officials doing
everything they can, this is overwhelming for anyone. So of course this is an
area that has needed international support and it's one of the areas that we've
prioritized for our humanitarian support. The UK has always been really active
here in helping women and girls. And health care is one of the areas where we've
been active through the UN. Dignity kits to help them keep clean, for example,
and working with local clinics and centers to enable access. But I think the
secondary thing that maybe we don't see so much is the effect of the stress on
women who are pregnant. So we do hear stories inevitably, horrible stories of
women finding themselves giving birth in shelters, for example, bomb shelters.
But the other statistic that is distressing that the Department of Health has
been talking about recently is the increasing numbers of women giving birth
prematurely. And those premature births are of course due to the heightened
stress of being displaced, of not having your family around you, of maybe not
coming from your flat anymore because it's been bombed. And the effect that has
on your physical health and your ability to be able to care for your child. So
it isn't even just the fundamental things of being able to take care of yourself
medically. And where I said the international community in the UK is helping.
It's also about this longer term trauma that we have to keep our eye on and
extend our support to as the war goes on. It's pretty distressing. It is
extremely sort of difficult to hear as well. And I want to move on to one of the
most disturbing events of this war. You tweeted last April that rape is a weapon
of war and there have been what has been referred to as an alarming increase in
gender based violence and transactional sex for food and survival. I'm just
going to read one of your tweets. You said, rape is a weapon of war, though we
don't yet know the full extent of its use in Ukraine. It's already clear it was
part of Russian arsenal. Women raped in front of their kids, girls in front of
their families. As a deliberate act of subjugation, rape is a war crime. Now
it's very difficult for me to read that and it must be horrendous for you to be
made aware of. But I know it's a big concern for you. It's also an issue I've
been passionate about for most of my career. So I've done a lot of work that the
UK has been a leader on preventing sexual violence. I ran that conference 10
years ago, another one last year, to keep the issue of sexual violence in war on
the agenda. And it's been heartbreaking to be in a country where the sheer scale
of it is still unknown, of course, because there are still occupied parts of
Ukraine that it's really clear how rape is being used as part of this hybrid war
to subjugate people. And I put that tweet out after the liberation of places
like Butch and Bravari, where we saw all of us have now seen, all visitors to
Ukraine have gone to these places and seen what Russian troops have done there.
But the invisible thing, so they have seen mass executions, the murder of people
shooting people in their cars as they try to escape, it's appalling stuff. But
the invisible side of this, which and why I put my tweet out, was what happened
to people who were trapped, who couldn't escape. And that that included
widespread sexual violence. It's incredibly important to me personally, but it's
certainly an important part of UK policy that we talk about this. And we support
it. And it's one of the areas that we are giving our support to. And one of the
areas that First Lady of Ukraine has stepped up to, to speak about and give some
championship to, because this is a country among many countries where people
don't talk about this kind of thing. It's quite taboo. Women don't talk about
sexual violence. They think you talk about domestic violence very much. So
you've got you've got a journey really to enable women to feel that if this has
happened to them, they can acknowledge it as a thing that has happened to them.
But how you talk about raising awareness about it, but but how are the
authorities attempting to combat the violence against women? It's actually I
think they're doing a pretty good job. Again, they've got an issue of scale,
like all parts of government do. But you have the Ministry of Social Policy
making sure that their law enforcement and their social services are
appropriately trained. And the Ministry of Interior working together with them
to make sure that services integrated, which means that if you're a woman to
whom something like this has happened, there is a place that you can go to where
you can speak to social services, to health care, you can give your story to a
lawyer and have it recorded. And that goes to the director of public
prosecutions. You can work out what care that you need and get it. You can speak
to police about security in your area, you can stay at a shelter. This was
already evolving before the war. So actually, this is something that Ukraine
knows how to do. But it is the scale of it. That is the challenge to try to make
that available to that many more women. And again, funding shelters, and this
sort of care and funding for the recording of crimes is another area that the UK
is active in here. And I know that women are playing an active part in the war
effort as well. While registering for military service is compulsory for men,
women can choose to volunteer, can't they? And in fact, aren't they making 22%
up of Ukraine's armed forces? So what role are women playing on the front line?
Well, so they are fighting now. So in the early years of women joining up, they
tended to be assigned to administrative roles, but now they are able to take
combat roles. And they are doing that. And I'm sorry to say that women are also
dying on the battlefield alongside men. And it's all incredibly hard, but that
too is incredibly hard. They face some administrative issues that we've also
given publicity to to make sure that they're not forgotten. For example, making
sure they have access to the right size uniform is a thing. The right size
medical care, which of course has to be spoke for women. And that has been a
journey, but a journey which the Ministry of Defense here is making good
progress on. But it's important to remember that there are so many different
ways to be defending your country. You can be fighting on the front line, but
there are also a rising number here of women D minors. This is on its way to
being the most mined country in the world. The landmass of mines in this country
is equivalent to the size of Britain at this stage. The challenge is enormous.
So you need women as well as men stepping up to help clean areas of land so that
people can work and so that fights can proceed. And that is one example of many
areas where women are stepping up and choosing those sorts of areas of work. So
they have work and be so that they can contribute. And this sort of gender
equality is something I know you're really passionate about. It's been really
high on your agenda with your work in Ukraine. What do you see as the impact of
women's involvement in the war long term? Because some are saying that many
women involved in this war will chip away at traditional sexist attitudes and it
will perhaps create a more equal society afterwards. What do you make of that? I
think it's perfectly possible. One thing that I do think has happened here is
that as in probably situations of war elsewhere, it throws up many different
kinds of hero. So people have many more pictures of what constitutes bravery in
their country. So of course there is frontline bravery and military bravery, but
there's also community bravery and there is family bravery and people are
talking about this at all different levels. It's also becoming clear how many
women have been agile in setting up businesses and moving them online so that
they can trade, they can make stuff and sell it. And this too is being
recognised. So I definitely think that has a long trail after the war ends. The
question I have and the area where we were all going to have to get involved is
what happens after Ukraine wins this, which I firmly believe they can and will,
and you've got over 300,000 troops who are not all going to be required to
fight, even as Ukraine will need stronger security in coming years. Those men,
many of those men will come back and want to do jobs. So then what happens to
the skills that the women have accumulated in that time who have had to be
running those, doing those jobs and running their communities. And if Ukraine
gets this right in their recovery and reconstruction and they factor in the
whole of the country, then they can power their country through to a position
where it can rebuild. But there is a real risk, and particularly in a country
like Ukraine that can be quite patriarchal, that they forget that. If they
forget that, then you lose a generation of acquired skills that women have
brought to bear during this time. It's good to hear of you talking about the
hope for the future. And it must be something that keeps people going actually.
But if we can reflect on the last year, because last time you spoke to Women's
Hour, you just had to leave Ukraine, you're now back in Kyiv. And I wondered,
you talked earlier about initially having that fear, but now having that sort of
acceptance in a way. Just earlier this week, you tweeted that sirens were
sounding in Kyiv and there's been a lot of those in the last few days. So you've
had to move away from the windows, pick up a book and carry on. It sounds so
matter of fact, it is commonplace, which is sad in itself, but it sounds like
the fear is lesson two. How is it for you and your team there at the moment?
Yes, I think all of us are in a place where we are alive to it. We often talk
with each other actually about how sirens can make your hand shake. They can
make your heartbeat faster. They can actually sounds that aren't sirens that you
think might be like just the sound of a motorbike or something on the road can
make you start as if something is happening. But none of us talk about it as an
active fear. And all of us talk about not being complacent. Nobody ignores an
air raid siren, but we factor it in to the daily work and we are deliberate in
carrying on, in keeping calm and carrying on. And if we have to continue our
work away from windows, then that's what we do. I've lost count of the number of
times I have moved my laptop down into the basement of this house and carried on
my work. Or I've moved from sleeping in my bedroom to sleeping in a teeny room
next door that's got no windows. It's just become a thing. I never ever want it
to feel normal, but I never or never want to let it overwhelm me. Also this
week, Putin made his annual speech and President Biden arrived as well. How
significant a visit was that? Massively significant. I think that all foreign
visits to Ukraine are significant. So when our Prime Minister, when Rishi Sunak
came here was a fantastic moment. And when President Biden came here, Ukrainians
really took heart, not least because in contrast, of course, to the UK, this was
the first visit by a US president in many years. President Biden had been
before, but when he when he had the foreign affairs brief, not as president. So
President United States coming to Ukraine was taken as such a message of hope
for their future, a message of confidence in Ukraine that Ukraine could be stood
by and was capable of winning and would have US backing or in the case of when
our Prime Minister came, UK backing or the backing of the EU or if any foreign
leaders who have come. This is part of what keeps Ukrainian morale high that
they see and feel and hear that support from allied countries. And the UK have
led this in a way. I remember Boris Johnson being the first world leader to
visit Ukraine after the conflict. But do you think that the international
community is doing enough to support Ukraine? I think that and certainly this is
the case in the UK. We we work really closely alongside the Ukrainian
authorities. We speak with them about the course of this this invasion, which of
course isn't a linear thing, twists and turns. It's it goes backwards and
forwards, ebbs and flows. And I know that our ministers have conversations
whereby they calibrate what they're providing according to what the Ukrainians
are asking for. The international community has come together in a way that has
never come together before politically, but also around the supply of weapons.
So the Ukrainians make that ask. And then the international community has to
work out who's got it, how they can supply it. And then they get on and do that.
So the UK may we will you know that we have supplied weapons. We have also
worked with others to source weapons and parts for weapons and transport for
weapons. It is a fantastic common effort, but it is led by what the Ukrainians
asked for. And that is great support. But realistically, I mean, I don't know
whether you can answer this question. But in your opinion, do you think there's
any chance of peace in the next six months or even in the next year? What is the
mood like there? And what is the hope for the future? The thing for Ukraine is
they have this now quite often used phrase, if Russia stops fighting, you know,
the war stops and they go home. If Ukraine stops fighting, they lose their
country. So this isn't a question of whether it takes internationally provided
weaponry or not for Ukrainians to keep fighting. Ukrainians will keep fighting
and they will keep running their communities and doing what they can to shore up
their economy and working by candlelight in the evening because they've got no
choice. So they'll they'll continue to do that. And what President Zelensky has
said more than once is if they're not provided with the right or enough capacity
to do that, they'll continue going. But it may take them longer to get there.
Day, Melinda Simmons, thank you. Thank you for your interview. Thank you for
your time. And thank you for what you're doing. I think the people of Ukraine
and those like yourself working tirelessly through this war are all in our
hearts, not just today, but especially today. So thank you for taking the time
to come and talk to us on Woman's Hour. Thanks so much. Now, this morning marks
a landmark moment for the Church of England. Leicester Cathedral is celebrating
having a fully female clergy team in what it believes might be a first for
England. The team consists of five women, including the Reverend Cannon Karen
rooms, the Cannon Reverend Cannon Emma Davis, the Cannon Pastor Reverend Cannon
Alison Adams, and curates Reverend Manuela Schmucki and Julia Bradshaw. Well,
joining me now is the Cannon Pastor Reverend Cannon Alison Adams at Leicester
Cathedral. Alison, thank you so much for coming to speak to us today. A
pleasure. Now, I know you grew up in the 1960s when you said there were no
female role models in the church. And so it was it was never a career you
expected, I believe. So so what changed that? What changed that was when the
vote went through and I realized that it was a possibility. There were female
role models, but it was very hierarchical when I was growing up. So I grew up in
a church where there were youngsters and there was a lot going on. And I had two
very dear friends. We did a lot of youth stuff together. They went on to be
ordained and I didn't because they were male and I was female. What changed, as
I say, was that was the vote went through and it was a real light bulb moment
for me. And I realized that, you know, that was where my life was heading,
should have been heading. And yeah, the rest is history, really. Because you
were a teacher at the time, weren't you? So it was a proper, a proper change. It
was a proper change. Yes. And I think I'm like quite a lot of women who went off
and did other exciting things, possibly knowingly, possibly not knowingly. I
think it's quite interesting that we were in a position now where young women,
young adult women are in a church where the leadership is a mix of male and
female and diverse beyond that. And they can see that and therefore they can
enter into the church workplace more easily, perhaps than people like myself
did. Some of our senior women have come from really, really interesting careers
outside and that's good too, as indeed it is with men. Now I know that you are
now in a team of five women leading the Leicester Cathedral. What has brought
this about? What brought this about was when Karen became the acting Dean, when
the Dean moved on to be Dean of Canterbury, Karen became acting Dean and we
looked at ourselves and we said, oh, we're all women. So it was another one of
those live all moments when you suddenly it happened and you realised there was,
well, we're here. We've got to this place. How did it feel at that moment? It
felt exciting. It felt good. I mean, Leicester does have a history in that
Leicester was the first cathedral to have a woman running the cathedral. That
was the now Bishop of Bristol before who took the role up in the year 2000. So
we do have a history. I believe it was the first to admit girls into a choir as
well. Exactly. We were the first to have a complete girls choir, not just admit
girls, but actually have a girls choir. And we have a very integrated and very
lovely system of choir now, which is entirely mixed. Girls, choir, boys, mixed,
you know, everything in different combinations, which is how it should be. So
how well represented are women in leadership roles throughout the Church of
England then? Well, we're still, we're nowhere near, we're nowhere near 50% in
terms of women in ministry roles yet. In this, among our patch, we're about 30,
we're about a third women in ministry roles and very much less in leadership
roles. So it is about leadership, really. I think women can come into ministry,
as I said, and the pathway is there, but it is much more difficult for them. And
I think we need to be as a church more intentional about helping women into
leadership roles. Yeah, there's still a lot more way to go, isn't there? Yeah,
well, I think we, I mean, the church faces same as many workplace faces issues
around work patterns, childcare, all of that sort of thing. Sexism, you know,
casual sexism, all that sort of thing is there in the church, as indeed it is in
many institutions and workplaces, we're no different. So there is a need to
address culture. And I do rejoice at our male colleagues who, you know, really
do support and champion this. You need people who aren't just women championing.
Yeah, I just want to pick up on that sexism you talk about that because it is a
culture that, as you say, still exists in what way you have you experienced that
and has that held you back in the past? Well, I never expected to be in church
leadership ever. When I was ordained, I've been ordained 25 years. When I was
ordained, I felt I had to be very much the pseudo male in order to elbow my way
into the room. So you kind of took on a male persona? I think I probably did.
Yes, I did, to be quite honest. And I'm not I, you'd have to ask my younger
colleagues how it feels to them. But it's, yeah, it's the same kind of sexism
that you can get in many an established structure, isn't it? Is that left out of
things overlooked, not listened to, not promoted? What was that like for you? Or
for others that you know of even that are also going through those struggles who
perhaps aren't where you are now? I think it's about not being listened to at
times. I think it's assumptions about competence, assumptions about perceived
gender behaviour, or not as the case may be. And it's about language sometimes,
too. I don't like being called dear, for instance, which can still happen,
sadly. Within what is essentially your workplace, you can often be called dear.
Yes, exactly. That would infuriate me too. I'm glad to hear it. And I know this
is something you feel quite passionately about. You say you now want to help
other women realise their potential. How are you planning to do that? Well, I
think every time we can highlight something like this, every time... Oh, I think
you're free, isn't it? Celebrating that, not putting down the fact that it's a
woman and not a man or not a person of any other gender diversity. But I think
we do have to be intentional. And I think we have to look at how we make it
easier for women, particularly young women with children, particularly women who
perhaps feel themselves to be less able to enter ministry, to be positive
towards them. And that is not denigrating the current ministry of men in any
way, shape or form. And are women applying for ministerial roles? Is that
happening? Are the women out there who need help to reach that stage? Oh, there
are women applying for ministerial roles. It's just... It's a slow climb. It's
not there yet. I know you're currently recruiting for the Dean of Leicester.
Now, the first woman to hold the role as Dean of Leicester was 2002. And the
current acting Dean is the Reverend Cannon, Karen Reams, of course. Have there
been women who have held this role since? And would you be open to a woman next?
We would certainly be open to a woman next. We would be open to the right person
of whatever gender and whatever cultural background it is about picking the
right person for this role at this moment in time. So, no, the person that
followed Viv was a man and that was fine too. And we've had a grand time. He's
gone on to Canterbury. We are up to whoever God calls to that position in this
place. And the fact there's five of you now must be a really trail-brazing
moment for other women who are coming into church and into the cathedral to be
able to see that. I mean, I can't believe it's taken so long for this to be the
first time it's happened, but there we are. How do you think it will impact
women who are coming and being part of the congregation, not even part, you
know, they don't even want to be a minister themselves, but they just want to
come and enjoy the service? Well, there is good research from the United States.
And anecdotally, I think we know it as well, that when women are leading
churches, young women are far more likely to engage with their spirituality and
perhaps go into ministry, perhaps not. And it certainly doesn't impact
negatively on young men at all. So it is a positive. That's great. Thank you so
much, Alison. It's been lovely to have you on the programme and good luck with
the job and good luck with working together. You're talking to someone who's on
an all women's team here today. So you're in a good place, but thank you for
joining us. Well, a spokesperson for the Church of England has told us that the
National Ministry team for the Church of England has long worked to encourage
women to consider vocations to ordained ministry. We know that we still have
some way to go, but we thank God for the witness and work of those women. We see
bringing their gifts and experiences to serve God and the church. Now, lots of
you have been getting in touch about a situation you've been in, a relationship
you've been in, where you've been through a tricky time when someone perhaps is
celebrating themselves. Here we have a message that says, I had a stillbirth in
June and had a nine hour labour to deliver her. Then my sister gave birth in
September to a baby girl. I couldn't acknowledge the baby at all. It was the
manifestation of what I'd lost. I found it very difficult and so did my sister.
Another one here says, I became pregnant quickly after getting married whilst my
sister had been trying to start her family for some time already and was
undergoing difficult and expensive treatment. Happily, she went on to have three
children, but I remember that time as being very upsetting for us both. And I
can read many more, but please keep those coming in because we will be speaking
to twin sisters, Lydia and Chloe, shortly about their experience of that. But
first of all, did you get married when you were 16 or 17? Was it a success or a
decision you came to regret? Are you still in that relationship or did it end
quickly? We're asking this because on Monday, the marriage and civil
partnership, the minimum age act comes into effect. The act will raise the age
of marriage and civil partnership to 18 in England and Wales, which means 16 to
17 year olds will no longer be able to marry or enter a civil partnership under
any circumstances, including with parental consent. So we want to know your
experience and hear your stories. You can text Women's Hour on 84844. Text will
be charged at your standard message rate or on social media. It's BBC Women's
Hour and you can still email us through our website as well. So were you one of
those 16 and 17 year olds who got married? We'd love to know how it's turned
out. Now on the program yesterday, we were discussing the important relationship
between siblings, especially when you are both going through difficult times.
But what do you do when something amazing happens to you while someone you love
is going through something terrible? A sibling, a best friend, or even a twin?
This is what happened to my next guests. They're twin sisters, Chloe and Lydia.
When Chloe was days away from giving birth, Lydia experienced her second
miscarriage and it tested their bond to the limit. They join me now to tell me
their story. Chloe and Lydia Hamilton, welcome to Women's Hour. Hi. Hi, Lydia,
I'm going to start with you. Why did you decide that you wanted to share your
experience? I know it was Chloe who wrote the article, but Lydia, it was you who
wanted to tell your story. Can you talk me through that decision and why you
came to that moment? Yeah, definitely. I think having gone through pregnancy
loss twice, I both times felt like there wasn't loads of, I suppose, loads of
support out there for people that were going through something similar,
particularly in the circumstances that we were in with a twin or someone who was
very close to us going through the thing that was sort of being taken away from
you. And I felt like it was something that needed to be spoken about and shared
on a wider platform than just me telling my friends and stuff. And I knew that
Chloe had such an, she was someone who could write that story from the heart and
really do it justice. So I sort of approached her and we kind of discussed how
it might look and how it might work. And we were very careful to make sure that
it was a story told, I suppose, in our words. So Chloe used a lot of the texts
and WhatsApp messages from that time rather than actually interviewing me. And I
think it really captured the feelings that we went through in that moment. And I
hoped it would, I suppose, raise awareness to something that is so challenging
and unfortunately so common. And Lydia, that must have been so difficult for you
to talk about it, but also to go through, I'm really, really sorry for your
loss. It must have been an incredibly difficult time. But talk to me about that
and how having your sister pregnant at the time, really conflicted with that.
Yeah, definitely. I think the first time was, how to say, the first time was the
hardest because it was an unknown territory and it was difficult. It was
difficult to navigate our relationship through something that neither of us had
been through and experienced before. And not only that, but I think for friends
and family trying to work out how to support both of us, Chloe, in the early
stages of her pregnancy and me going through my recent loss, I know that was
challenging for them. And then the second time, we almost felt, when I felt
pregnant the second time, that goodness, this wouldn't happen again. This was
our moment. This was going to be great. And I think there was, Chloe talked
about in her piece, in her article, that there was a few weeks, a month or so,
well, we both felt, God, this is great. This weight had been lifted from her
shoulders and then it came crashing down again. And yeah, there really are no
words to explain that feeling. But I think, and Chloe, I'm sure, would agree, I
hope, would agree that actually, I think it brought us closer together. We've
always been incredibly close as sisters. And now I feel even closer because we
have this real shared understanding of what each other's been through. And I
felt guilty because I wanted Chloe and I wanted my friends and family to
celebrate such an exciting time. But it was bookended by, you know, one of the
most difficult experiences of my life. So yeah, it was very, very conflicting
and incredibly difficult. You said something that really struck me. You said not
only had you lost a baby, you felt you'd lost your sister in that time. But I'm
so pleased to hear that you've got your relationship back and you're back
together stronger. Chloe, could I come to you? And are you able to tell me about
your experiences because you were obviously going through a wonderful
celebration, a time of joy in your life when Lydia faced such sadness? Chloe,
are you there? We may have lost Chloe for a moment. But Lydia, we've got you. I
can speak on the behalf of her. Yeah. Well, they do say that twins have that
special connection when you know what each other's thinking. So maybe I can just
ask you all the questions for now. But how difficult was it for you to deal with
your own grief whilst also feeling happy for your sister? Because Chloe was
going through this amazing moment. She was pregnant. She was obviously expecting
your nephew, as you now know, Fabian. So how was it for you to deal with grief
whilst also feeling a kind of happiness? Yeah, it was a really strange feeling.
And there was moments where I felt just pure joy, especially once I'd met Fabian
and he was here because he was, you know, he was completely innocent. I mean, we
all were, but he really had no idea, I suppose, about the heartache that had
gone before him. So actually, and I think Chloe speaks in the article that when
as soon as he was born, I found the whole thing a little bit easier because he
was there and he was, you know, such an amazing, he's such an amazing child. And
I love that relationship that we have. And it's an incredibly special one as a
twin, Aunty. I think it's a really special relationship. We're very similar. We
look similar. We have the same sort of personality, me and this 15 month old.
It's quite nice to know that we are that close. But I think it was, I had sort
of, there was times where I had to put my sort of own feelings aside and be
there to support Chloe and be happy for Chloe. Even though I know deep down I
was really struggling. So I had an amazing support network around me and my
husband was incredibly supportive, knowing that, you know, he was, he got me
kind of, I suppose, the raw Lydia in those moments, whereas on the surface,
maybe to my friends and family, I was trying to be more positive. So I think
just having the friends and family around you is incredibly helpful. Gosh, that
must have been so difficult for you. I know that Chloe wrote in her article,
actually, if jealousy is felt easily by twins, so is grief. There must have been
moments when you felt jealous, but there must have been moments when Chloe felt
your grief too. Could you, could you feel those opposite feelings and
experiences from opposite directions? I know it's a really tricky question to
ask, but in a way you're feeling both emotions, aren't you? Yeah, 100%. And then
you feel, you feel guilt as well for feeling the grief and not being able to
support Chloe. And definitely in those, with the first pregnancy, the first
miscarriage in Chloe's pregnancy initially, it was hard because it was, I mean,
it was within a matter of weeks that I was, that, you know, that it was all
happening. And I found it so hard to feel happy for Chloe's news. But I also
think because I'd gone through this loss, Chloe was incredibly anxious in the
first few weeks and months of her pregnancy, having experienced someone close to
her go through miscarriage. And I felt like I couldn't support her through that
because when she wanted reassurance, I couldn't give that to her because my
experience had been lost. So I felt then guilt that I couldn't be the sister
that I would have wanted to be in those days. And likewise, in the second, the
second miscarriage, when I went into the hospital to see Chloe after having
Fabian, I was still miscarrying. So just physically, I felt very distant from
her. And I felt like I needed her when Fabian needed her. And that was
incredibly hard. And I felt guilty for feeling like that as well. So there's a
whole load of emotions, guilt, grief, but also happiness for Chloe. It's a real
cocktail of emotions that it's very hard to unpack. But yeah, I think it's made
both of us stronger for it. Gosh, it sounds incredibly hard. I think we may have
Chloe on the line now. Chloe, are you there? No, we can't hear you, Chloe.
Sorry. Have you pressed the old unmute button? Don't worry. Not at all. We'll
hopefully hear from you a bit later, Chloe. But Lydia, how did your different
experiences change your relationship? Because I know you've said you're stronger
now, but you must have had to go through sometimes when you felt very distant.
How did you manage to build a strong relationship? And for anyone, there's lots
of people texting about this actually saying that they've gone through similar
things. How do you not fall apart? Yeah, I think that it's a really good
question. I think it's, you know, just in terms of practical advice of how to
kind of withstand something like this. You know, I think we had to be very open
with each other about what was too much and what was too difficult. So
definitely in those early days of, you know, the first when Chloe found out that
she was pregnant and I just miscarried, and then the second time when I
miscarried and Chloe was about to give birth. And when she just, when she did
give birth, I had to sort of be really open and say, you know, on a family chat,
if it's, there's too much chat around pregnancy or birth or the baby, I would
need to step away. And I would advise anyone going through something similar,
know your own limits and know what, what you protect your own heart, because
it's more important to do that. You'll be stronger on the other side if you do
do that, rather than putting yourself in a situation where you're going to find
it hard. So I would step away, I would, you know, I would go make a cup of tea
for everyone whilst they queued over over Fabian or I would mute a couple of
Facebook, Facebook chats, or WhatsApp chats, just so I could kind of have my own
time to breathe and process. And actually, I think one of the things I've really
wanted to do in the two years having been through this, it's two years last
week's the first miscarriage, but I really wanted to try and, you know, support
other people going through and offer advice that I can do and, you know, friends
and family who maybe go through something similar, I've always tried to be an
ear to help them and give them advice. So knowing, knowing your limits is really
important, know when to step away is really important. Yeah. And it's funny you
chat about the whole family actually, because what about your other family
members? I imagine your parents who are now grandparents have also grieving with
you at the same time. So how have they dealt with the situation? Yeah, they've
been incredible. I think all the family have been amazing. And you know, I think
it was incredibly difficult for my mum who, you know, was celebrating having her
first grandchild, but also grieving the loss of two other grandchildren that she
never got to meet. And, you know, I think we've worked out sort of how and when
we talk about it and work with it, but it was, you know, I can't imagine how
hard that would have been for her. She's been an incredible support throughout
the whole experience and journey. So yeah, there's actually, I reached out to a
couple of charities whilst I was going through it and there's a charity called
Petals and they actually also offer support for grandparents, which I think is
incredibly important and maybe not often thought about. So she also reached out
to sort of grandparents going through bereavement through a pregnancy loss on a
Facebook group. And I think that was a huge support for her as well, which is
great. That's great. Petals are a fantastic charity actually to help with that.
And I believe Chloe is on the line now. Chloe, are you there? Hi, I'm here.
Wonderful to hear you. Lydia has done a very good job of saying your side of the
story, but I know you originally wrote this article. It was difficult for you
going through your pregnancy while your sister was grieving. And I think it's
not, it's not an uncommon situation actually. We've had lots of people
contacting the programme talking about their situations. But I know a friend of
mine wasn't able to speak to me at all while I was pregnant because she had
suffered the loss of a child. And I know a friend who had to move house when she
found out her neighbour was pregnant because she just couldn't face seeing them
every day when she had miscarried. It is great that you've opened up and talked
about it because so many people must be in a similar situation. Why was it you
felt you had to write about it, Chloe? More personally, I apologize for the tech
issue. I think actually, Lydia sharing her story first was really important in a
way because it is her story. Ultimately, I felt like I was the sort of the
medium through which she did that, but ultimately it was her tale. But I think
it was important, well, important for our relationship really to be as open with
each other as possible. We always have been, but actually when I was writing it,
it sort of forced us in a way to lay all of these feelings fair and maybe even
to say things to each other that we hadn't said before. You know, I didn't know
that Lydia was still bleeding when she came to the hospital to see Fabian. That
was the minute we discussed. It was sort of forced us in a way to be so open
with each other, which I think was really important. I feel really reluctant to
say that it was difficult for me because I don't feel like I have the right to
that difficulty that Lydia's experience. But actually, there were elements that
were and are and continue to be hard. Having a baby is a huge deal. Having a
baby is a difficult thing. I think sometimes I feel like I need to be enjoying
and making the most of every single moment, no matter how difficult, because I'm
so lucky to be here. But the reality is that, you know, if I sleep at night,
it's difficult. There's a lot of freedom. Sometimes it's difficult.
Occasionally, I'll look at Lydia's freedom at the moment and think, oh, do you
know what I'd really like to have a night's sleep or, you know, go out with a
friend without having to think of find a baby sister. So, yeah, I think it is.
I'm really reluctant to say it was hard for me because, of course, in
comparison, it wasn't. But I know it's difficult for both of you and I'm getting
lots of texts that I just want to read a couple to you because people are
feeling the same. And this one says I had an incredibly blessed, healthy
pregnancy last year, but my sister lost two babies at the same time. The guilt I
carry for this is something I don't feel I can express to anyone. And another
one, it was incredibly painful to endure a fairly late miscarriage of a baby
that was due on the same day as my best friends. So very challenging to watch
her pregnancy advancing day by day as I mourned the loss of mine. I don't know
whether you two have any advice for people who are feeling the same thing that
you've been through. Yeah. Yeah, I think my advice is to be to be really open
with your friend or your sibling who is going through something like that. So
from my perspective, I needed to say to friends who maybe were announcing
pregnancies or going through a pregnancy at the time I was going through these
losses. You know, I might feel a bit distant right now. And that's what I'm
going to have to do to preserve our friendship. It's an actually, you know, I
have some incredible friend, loads of incredible friends. And they already
respected that and knew that if I needed to step away and be a little bit
distant, it wasn't through any fault of their own. It was just what we needed to
do to help for me to help myself get through the situation. And I always say for
anyone who's maybe experienced or found out they're pregnant and they know that
their friend or sibling has experienced losses is a really important way, I
think, to approach that conversation with them. And I always say, you know, why
not tell them in person because their reaction might not be how you expect it to
be and actually texting someone to say, I've got this news to share with you and
this is the, you know, I understand this might be difficult for you is actually
one of the best things that you can do, letting someone process that news in
their own time and deal with it, how they need to deal with it is one of the
best, the kindest things that you can do. And it might feel, you know, it might
feel kind of rude to text them on that. Yeah, but it gives them that time and
space to reflect on. Thank you so much for that advice. It's been lovely to
speak to you both, Lydia and Chloe. Thank you so much for coming on the
programme. Now, The New Bend is the name of an exhibition running at the Howser
and Worth Gallery. In Somerset, it showcases the work of 12 contemporary artists
and quilters whose work pays homage to the enduring legacy of the women of the
Jees Bend, Alabama Quilters, who were quilting as early as the 19th century in
the Alabama Black Belt in America. Well, joining me now is Farin Gibson, an
artist, historian and textile artist whose work features in this exhibition.
Farin, you've got some of your work with in the studio now. It's beautiful. The
colours are so vibrant. It's amazing. Talk to me through what this represents.
What is it all about? Yeah, this is a textile work I've created. I've been
working on a kind of series of works I call Culminations, where I'm
experimenting with materials and kind of the idea of, oh, could a quilt be
painterly? And so doing a lot of investigating, a lot of failing in my process.
Well, it looks wonderful. I wouldn't say there's any failure there. Oh, I feel
happy with where it is now. Yeah, it's experimentation. And it's originated from
your interest in the Jees Bend, Alabama Quilters. Who were they? Can you explain
who they are and what they're about? Well, so my connection to the Jees Bend
Quilters is the show that's going on at Houser and Wher Somerset right now,
which is called The New Bend. It's curated by Legacy Russell. And she's
basically gotten together this group of 12 artists whose work in some way
engages with the legacy or the practice of quilting or the Jees Bend Quilters.
And I'm sorry to say I've never heard of them before. Are they quite a small
group? Where do they come from? Kind of small. Yeah. So they come from a place
that's called Jees Bend in Alabama. It's really the town of Boykin. And they
descend from a group of people who were brought to the area by a plantation
owner in like 1816. He established this plantation and brought these enslaved
people there. And generations of people began to, women particularly, make
quilts and pass down this skill for quite functional reasons to start with, to
keep warm, make using scraps and materials that were available to them. But they
have such an incredible aesthetic, really abstract, gorgeous works that are
quite unique. Yeah. It's beautiful. Thanks. But tell me about your personal
relationship to quilting because I believe your grandmother and her mother as
well were both quilters. Yes. Tell me about that. How did you discover that and
how did you get into it? Well, it's kind of a thing you grow up with, or I say
you, but like my experience, I grew up with it, saw the quilts and didn't
necessarily think that much about them. And then I wrote the book Women's Work,
which talks about textile and ceramic artists. And it gave me a whole new
appreciation for these mediums, how difficult they are, how special they are,
and how these can become kind of heirloom goods, but also kind of beautiful art
objects. And as I was writing the book, I felt a real, I don't know, drive this
pull to engage with the medium myself, especially as so many women artists
who've worked in these mediums have learned their skills from women in their
families or their connections to women in their communities. And is it always
women? Talk me through how that sort of group of women work together. So the
Gee's Bend quilters. So it's kind of a collective. They still work today,
descended from the same generations of people. And sometimes they get together
and help each other out. I know with my grandmothers, it might be that one woman
makes a quilt top, and then they layer the sandwich together, the quilt
sandwich. So the top, the batting in the middle and the bottom. And then maybe a
group of women get together and help stitch it all together. So you can see the
stitching on my quilt. Yeah, maybe clearly. It sounds out. I did that myself,
but sometimes groups will get together. It's like a production line. Yeah, well,
yeah. It helps the work go a lot faster because you can imagine with a big
quilt, it would take ages to hand quilt that. Of course. And I understand since
you've started quilting, your son has taken an interest and you've sort of shown
him a bit about it. Do you think you may pass it on to a new generation and a
male at that? Yeah, yeah. Anyone can quilt, absolutely. He's seven, so I worry a
little bit about the needles. Right. Did he realize you were seven? He does ask.
Well, he does ask. He's like, oh, mom, I want to quilt. And I want to teach him
definitely. Yeah. And how long does it take you to take? Because as you say,
it's usually a whole sort of group tribe of people. So how long does it take you
personally to invest? Well, it can be really different. Quilting historically,
it can be a collective thing to do, but also very individual. It depends on how
complex the pattern is on the top, how you're gathering materials. There's a lot
of steps to it, washing the materials, ironing them, cutting the little pieces,
sewing it together. So it can really vary in the length. And I know that you
released a book called Women's Work from Feminine Arts to Feminist Art. Yes.
What do you mean by that title? It got me quite intrigued because quilting is
traditionally a women's work, but seeing it as a feminist art, how does that
come into play? Well, the book covers a lot of different types of textile work,
weaving as well, and soft sculpture, ceramics, things like that. Basically,
there's been this kind of historical attitude that certain kinds of art forms
were the work that women did or domestic pursuits, and that it was for some
reason separate to fine art in quotations, which is nonsense, of course. And so
especially in the 20th century, we can see so many incredible women artists who
use these mediums specifically to engage with and challenge that idea, but
they're also talking about personal identity and love and nature and so many
topics. And it's a signpost for them, really, isn't it? Yeah. Thank you, Farron.
Your work is beautiful. Thank you. And I know that it's going to be at the New
Bend exhibition created by Legacy Russell, and it's open at Houser and Wirth
Somerset until the 8th of May. So make sure you take a look at that. Thank you
so much for coming on the programme. Thank you. And thank you for joining in the
discussions today. It's been lovely to have your comments. I just want to read a
few more here about people coping with things while life is tricky. Interesting
to hear the twins talking about going through difficult times. Well, my
identical twin has cerebral palsy, so we do this on a permanent basis. Watching
my twin struggle is very difficult, and for her watching me have an easier life
is very difficult. Well, that's all from the programme today, but we will be
back with Weekends Woman's Hour tomorrow. Woman's Hour was presented by Hayley
Hassell, produced by Louise Cauley. The studio engineer was Bob Nettles. On
Radio 4. Our Father. Who art in heaven? Hallowed be thy name. Hallowed be thy
name. The Lord's Prayer is shared by Christians around the world. On earth as it
is in heaven. In this year's Lent Talks, six people reflect on the words of this
prayer. As we forgive those who trespass against us. Sharing stories of
forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. For thine is the kingdom.
Lent Talks, on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Begins next Wednesday evening at 8.45.
Amen. This afternoon Matthew Syed traces the origins and evolution of a term
that's become synonymous with our era of...