TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-05-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
...improvised theatre. From Our Own Correspondent is next. This is the BBC World
Service, the world's radio station. On From Our Own Correspondent after the
bulletin, the downfall of a top cop who was once thought untouchable. He'd met
successive US presidents, been a trusted confidante of the US Drug Enforcement
Administration, held one of the highest posts in the Mexican government for
years. Did he simply know too much to be prosecuted successfully? The glories of
Cambodia's ancient past and their long journey home. She pointed at a dark red
gemstone set in the gold. If you look carefully, there's a figure carved into
the stone, she marvelled. Also, some ways around a freezing winter and an energy
crisis in Uzbekistan. Gas pressure is so low in some flats, it takes almost an
hour to boil water for a pot of tea. Some people heat bricks in their kitchen
ovens to warm their flats. Bricks stay warmer for longer than their central
heating. That's From Our Own Correspondent, after this bulletin of BBC World
News. Hello, I'm Neil Nunes with the BBC News. After more than a decade of
negotiations, the countries of the United Nations have agreed the first ever
treaty to protect the oceans that lie outside national boundaries. Delegates
cheered as the agreement was finally signed. Environmental groups say it'll help
reverse marine biodiversity losses and ensure sustainable development, as
Maystala reports. After more than 30 straight hours of negotiations, countries
from around the world, from China to the Pacific Island nation of Palau, have
finally come to an agreement on how to protect the high seas. These are the
international waters that sit beyond any country's jurisdiction. They account
for two-thirds of the world's oceans and play host to most of our marine life,
an estimated two million species. Now nations have agreed to set up marine
protected areas, which will restrict these activities, although to what extent,
we do not yet know. China has announced a reduced economic growth target of
about 5% at the start of its annual parliamentary session in Beijing. The
economy grew by just 3% last year, well on the target. Under pressure from
strict COVID containment policies, our China correspondent is Stephen McDonald.
At the Great Hall of the People in Beijing, Premier Li Keqiang told nearly 3,000
delegates that China overcame great difficulties last year and that it succeeded
in maintaining an overall stable economic performance. However, the government
here has been criticised for prolonging its zero COVID approach that hit large
sections of business and smashed the livelihoods of ordinary people. Over the
next nine days, this gathering will also place a range of Xi Jinping loyalists
into senior government roles. Israel's seen the largest protests so far against
the government's planned judicial reforms. Up to 200,000 people took to the
streets with flags and banners for the ninth Saturday in a row. The
demonstrations were largely peaceful, but there were some clashes in Tel Aviv
and Jerusalem. Congress in Ecuador has voted overwhelmingly to open an internal
investigation on corruption allegations involving President Guillermo Lasso. The
vote could eventually lead to impeachment proceedings. Here's Leonardo Rocha.
More than 70% of legislators have voted against the president, a former banker
who has experienced turbulent relations with Congress since he was elected in
2021. Mr Lasso has been accused of involvement in a corruption scheme involving
state-owned companies. On social media, he rejected the allegations and said the
congressional report lacked any logical and legal basis. The prospect of a
political crisis comes at a very difficult time for Ecuador, which is struggling
to cope with unprecedented levels of gang-related violence, triggered by the
growing power of Mexican drug cartels in the country. World News from the BBC.
At least five people have been injured in Peru after the security forces opened
fire against indigenous protesters. In the southern city of Huli, local media
say the demonstrators had encircled a group of soldiers and police officers. An
army helicopter threw tear gas canisters to disperse the crowd. The city's
police station has been set on fire. The British Prime Minister says he's
committed to ensuring that no one who arrives in the UK illegally will be
allowed to stay. Writing in a British newspaper, Rishi Sunak described his
determination to stop migrants crossing the channel in small boats. Helen Catt
now has more details. Rishi Sunak has made stopping small boat crossings one of
his five priorities for government. He's expected to announce it with the Home
Secretary, Suella Braverman, next week. Newspaper reports suggest it will
include making asylum claims inadmissible from those who travel to the UK on
small boats, and placing a duty on the Home Secretary to remove anyone who
arrives that way as soon as reasonably practicable to Rwanda or a safe third
country. It's reported that arrivals will be prevented from claiming asylum
while in the UK, and that there are plans to ban them from returning. Some
organisations have raised concerns about whether this would be compatible with
human rights laws. Two workers for the International Red Cross have been
kidnapped in Mali. The organisation said the abductions took place on a road
between the northern cities of Gao and Kidal, a hotspot for violence by Islamist
militias. Kidnappings are common, with motives including demands for ransom. The
French football star Kylian Mbappe has become the top goalscorer in the history
of his club, Paris Saint-Germain. The 24-year-old World Cup winner scored near
the end of PSG's victory over Nantes on Saturday. It was Mbappe's 201st goal in
all competitions for the club. That's the latest BBC World News. Hello, you're
listening to From Our Own Correspondent here on the BBC World Service. I'm
Pascale Harter. Welcome to the programme. In this edition, the lost gold of
Cambodia's ancient empires returns home after a family in the UK vowed to return
it. Uzbekistan is not short of gas, so why have so many homes gone unheated
during its freezing winter? And why in some places did it take an hour just to
boil water for tea? And a rebel spirit runs through the capital of Lithuania
from days of old. First, though, to the tale of a man who once enforced the war
on drugs in Mexico and has now been convicted of working with the narco cartels.
Genaro Garcia Luna is the highest-ranking Mexican official ever to be charged
with drug trafficking in the United States. He was found guilty by a jury in New
York. Mr Garcia Luna once had the top job in Mexican law enforcement, so the
links to organised crime described at his trial have come as a huge
embarrassment to the Mexican government. The evidence was particularly damaging
to ex-President Felipe Calderón. He denies any wrongdoing himself, but it was he
who appointed Mr Garcia Luna Secretary of Public Security. Will Grant has
reported for years from across Latin America, Mexico and the United States on
the havoc wreaked by the drug cartels and has been following the spectacular
fall from grace of a man who Mexicans once saw as almost untouchable. In a New
York courtroom, US prosecutor Sarita Comatereri employed some vivid imagery to
describe the illegal cross-border activities of the Sinaloa cartel. These guys
are like the FedEx of cocaine, she exclaimed. They use trains, they use ships,
they use containers, they use submarines. They even used the Mexico City
airport, she said, of the group's smuggling operations, which brought tons of
cocaine into the United States each year. But this wasn't a trial of any of the
Sinaloa cartel's leaders. None of the criminal organisation's members were in
the dock. Rather, nine of them, convicted drug traffickers serving jail time in
the US, testified for the prosecution. The man on trial, Genaro Garcia Luna, had
supposedly been leading the battle against them. Between 2006 and 2012, Garcia
Luna was Mexico's Public Security Minister. He was, in effect, the country's
anti-drug czar and the public face of the much-vaunted war on drugs. He was
meant to bring the cartels down, or at least be working towards that aim.
Instead, alleged US prosecutors, Garcia Luna was working with organised crime,
hand-in-hand with the Sinaloa cartel, taking millions of dollars in bribes to
protect their organisation and direct the might of the Mexican state against
their rivals. When I moved to Mexico in 2011, at the tail end of President
Felipe Calderón's administration, two men stood out in the country's drug war,
mired in one of its most violent periods. The first was the notorious leader of
the Sinaloa cartel, Joaquin El Chapo Guzmán. Today, he is Federal Prisoner
Number 89914-053, serving life plus 30 years in a supermax high-security prison
in the state of Colorado. The other was Genaro Garcia Luna. With his crew-cut
hair and pristine suits, he tried to project an image of Mexico's supercop, the
director of Mexico's equivalent of the FBI. He founded the Federal Police Force
in 2009. It was meant to be a new arm in the fight against organised crime. Yet
rumours about his vast and unexplained wealth wouldn't go away. The mud was
beginning to stick. In court, captured Sinaloa cartel members began to point the
finger at the ex-Security Minister, implicating him in a vast cocaine-smuggling
conspiracy. Eventually, he was arrested in Dallas in 2019. The two men, El Chapo
and Garcia Luna, the cartel boss and the supercop, were tried in the same
courthouse in Brooklyn. Guzmán himself didn't testify in Garcia Luna's trial,
but another former kingpin, Jesús el Rey Zambada, the brother of one of the
Sinaloa cartel's founders, did. Zambada said he'd personally delivered $5
million in bribes to Mr Garcia Luna at a restaurant in Mexico City. Others
testified to making similar payments, which ramped up in price as Mr Garcia Luna
rose within the chain of political command. Still, as the jury prepared to
consider their verdict, there was the nagging sensation the case wasn't, as the
Americans say, a slam dunk for the US government. No money, no photos, no
videos, no texts, no emails, no records, Mr Garcia Luna's defense attorney had
said at the end of the trial, repeating a line that he'd used at the very start.
On some level it was true. The prosecution had relied almost exclusively on
witness testimonies, including those of the nine incarcerated cartel members.
When the five men and seven women of the jury retired to consider the case,
there was some optimism in the Garcia Luna camp that things might go his way.
After all, he'd met successive US presidents, been a trusted confidant of the US
Drug Enforcement Administration, held one of the highest posts in the Mexican
government for years. Did he simply know too much, went one theory in Mexico, to
be prosecuted successfully? Would he somehow avoid a US jail sentence? The
answer was a resounding no. Garcia Luna guilty on all charges, I said, reading
the news alert which popped up on my phone. I was in the region where the drug
war began, in the west of Mexico, and where it still rages today, almost two
decades after Mr Garcia Luna was put in charge of it. I was having lunch with a
priest who'd had two good friends murdered in the drug war violence during that
time. He nodded, slowly digesting this development in a distant courtroom. An
architect of a narco-state, he replied deliberately, before reaching for the
rice. That was Will Grant. Imagine studying something from antiquity of which
very few examples survive. These things tell you a story of your country's
history and its people. You dedicate scholarly years to studying them from
historical records, and then, quite suddenly, you discover that they still
exist, and you are going to see for yourself not just one piece, but a whole
treasure trove. Some magnificent items from Cambodia's distant past have
resurfaced in London. They're the haul of a notorious trafficker in stolen
artworks. Under the Khmer Rouge regime in the 1970s, during which two million
Cambodians were killed, many pieces of the country's cultural heritage were
looted. Often, these antiquities were sold through dealers in Asia to buyers in
Europe and the US. But now, finally, Cambodian scholars and students have a
chance to reconnect with these precious and often very beautiful objects. Celia
Hatton tells us the story. Sonetra Sung picked up the piece of gold jewellery in
front of her as if it could split apart at any moment. It looked, at first, like
a brooch or a belt buckle. It was quite flat and small, about the size of a
playing card, and yet Sonetra held it gently with two hands, cupping it in her
palms. We're not sure yet what this was used for, she said softly. We think it
might have been the decorative piece from the front of a crown. Then she pointed
at a dark red gemstone set in the gold. If you look carefully, there's a figure
carved into the stone, she marvelled. They were very good craftsmen back then.
She was smiling, and yet almost everything about this scenario felt wrong.
Sonetra is an art historian and an archaeologist. She wrote her master's thesis
on Ankorian jewellery from the era when Cambodia's Khmer Empire was at its
height, around the 12th century. She's in the middle of a PhD now, in London.
And yet, until recently, she'd hardly had any contact with real Ankorian
jewellery. Some of these crowns, earrings and necklaces had actually made it
through the centuries in Cambodia, through occupations by Vietnam, Japan and
France, and more recently, through three decades of civil war that began in the
1970s. And even more surprising, some jewellery had resurfaced in London. The
collection, all 77 pieces of it, was part of an illicit trove assembled by a
known antiquities smuggler, a British man named Douglas Latchford. Cambodian
investigators now understand that Latchford was the mastermind behind a global
looting network, snatching antiquities from Khmer empires and funnelling them to
eager buyers overseas. He died in 2020 while awaiting trial in the US. That's
how Sunetra and I came to be sitting with part of Latchford's hidden haul. He'd
stashed it in London for decades. After he died, his family pledged to return
his collection to Cambodia. The location of our meeting also felt off-kilter,
inside a high-security warehouse in South London. We had to pass through prison-
style gates and show our passports to get anywhere close to the room where the
jewellery was kept. It was laid out on soft white paper. With bright light
shining overhead, the whole room felt sterile, like an operating theatre, worlds
away from the jewellery's original home in the monumental, majestic temples of
Angkor. A few days after, the jewellery was flown back to Phnom Penh. When the
gold was unpacked inside the country's National Museum, Buddhist monks were on
hand to celebrate the return. The jewellery connects Cambodians to their
ancestors. Some of it was made to adorn temple statues, which are believed to be
living gods. A satisfying end to a long saga? Yes, in some ways. But the story
doesn't stop here. So many stolen Cambodian antiquities are still overseas, in
museums and private collections. Investigators told me they simply don't know
how much Angkorian jewellery was sold by Latchford and his network, even if they
pinpoint where the treasures might be, there's no certainty they'll be able to
bring them back. Inside Cambodia, there are problems too. The country's
authoritarian leader, Hun Sen, is up for re-election in July, though there's
little chance he'll lose. Independent media outlets and any meaningful
opposition parties have been dismantled. The last outspoken radio station was
just shut down. So it's no surprise the jewellery's return is being painted as a
political victory for Hun Sen and his family. One of the Prime Minister's sons
was on hand in London to witness the jewellery's formal handover to the
Cambodian authorities. That's what Cambodia's immediate future looks like. But
archaeologist Sunitsra Sung is focused on piecing together the past. In the
London warehouse, she picked up a pair of heavy gold earrings to show me. These
are from the 8th century, we think, she says, but they're very similar to ones
from 500 BC. Now we have the actual objects to look at, we can try to prove that
link. All of this shows that the rumours about Cambodia's past are true, she
explains. Once, we were very, very rich. Celia Hatton. You're listening to From
Our Own Correspondent on the BBC World Service with me, Pascale Harter. Which
country's energy supplies haven't been affected by the Russian invasion of
Ukraine? Well, you might think that the post-Soviet republics of Central Asia
have had their heating on throughout winter, given their own huge reserves of
natural gas and their polite, if wary, relationship with Moscow. But many people
in Uzbekistan have been struggling to keep warm amid a domestic fuel crisis. It
has warmed up a bit now, but Ibrat Safo was one of the people who had to shiver
their way through the past few months. I get out of bed. I'm already wearing
tracksuit bottoms over thermal long johns I brought from London, as well as two
jumpers and a bobble hat. I'm renting a flat on the Presidential Avenue, one of
the most prestigious roads in Tashkent. I feel the radiator. It should be red
hot at this time of year. Instead, it's just lukewarm. This has been the coldest
winter on record in Uzbekistan since 1969. And to cap it all off, there's almost
no gas. The temperatures outside have been below minus 20 for weeks. I look
outside to see if any snow has melted. It still glows like crystals in the
beautiful but powerless Tashkent sunshine. In the distance, a local Soviet-era
power station puffs out clouds of white smoke. But it isn't enough. Uzbekistan,
one of the largest gas producers in the world, is in the throes of a full-blown
energy crisis. In past years, it was the towns and villages that complained of
fuel shortages. This year, it's Tashkent. The capital used to be where other
Uzbeks sought refuge in cold winters, in the well-heated apartments of family
and friends. Now they joke, come to the villages, at least we've got log
burners. A friend who lives in a multi-story block nearby has posted a picture
of her neighbours cooking outside on a makeshift stove in a snowy children's
playground. Gas pressure is so low in some flats, it takes almost an hour to
boil water for a pot of tea, much longer to cook a meal. Some people heat bricks
in their kitchen ovens to warm their flats, because the bricks stay warmer for
longer than their central heating. It's not just gas. Some people have no water
either, because of frozen pipes. There have been queues at gas and petrol
stations. Electricity is affected too. 85% of Uzbekistan's electricity is
generated by gas, and it's being turned off throughout the city. One day, one
apartment block plunges into darkness, while a neighbouring block is kept lit.
The next day, in a sort of a chess move, it's reversed, lights out in one, back
on in the other. It's done, I'm told, to conserve energy and spread the burden.
But in a country where people are wary of even using the word protest, there are
reports of people gathering, demanding electricity and heating from their local
officials. In one town near Tashkent, a desperate mother shocked the country by
holding a gas worker hostage with a knife. President Shabgat Mirzoyev has been
holding emergency meetings. Various officials, including the head of the
national electricity grid and the mayor of Tashkent have been sacked. The mayor
is a powerful and a controversial figure, but his removal won't solve the
crisis. Uzbekistan's energy infrastructure hasn't been modernised for years.
Some of it dates back to the 60s, when Uzbekistan was still part of the Soviet
Union. Yes, the country is rich in gas, but for over a decade, the government
has preferred to sell it abroad for a higher price than it would get on the
domestic market. Much has gone to China. In December, as the crisis grew, the
government announced foreign sales had stopped. But the numbers from China tell
a different story. And then there's Russia. There are rumours of deals with
Russian energy giants. The story goes the Uzbek government owes them millions.
It's even been announced that this gas-rich country is now going to buy gas from
Russia. The government won't reveal the details, of course. Nothing is
transparent here. There's a knock on the door of my flat. A policeman stands on
the landing. Brother, he says, I'm making sure elderly people living alone have
all they need. Would you take my picture in your neighbour's flat, please? I
need it for my report. Inside the flat is an old lady and a yappy little dog in
a tiny kitchen. Do you have bread, grandma? asks the policeman, as I click away
with his phone camera. I have plenty of bread, she replies, but I'm freezing.
OK, but you have bread, don't you? the policeman asks again, ignoring her
complaints about the sad state of the heating. It'll take more than a local
policeman with a camera to solve Uzbekistan's energy crisis. Ibrat Saffo. These
days, Lithuania is a small country on the north-eastern fringe of the European
Union. It is a NATO member state and a proud Baltic nation with its own distinct
identity. But centuries ago, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania was one of the largest
and most powerful states in all of Europe. It ruled huge territories, stretching
over today's Belarus, Ukraine and parts of Poland and Russia. This year, the
Lithuanian capital, Vilnius, has been celebrating its 700th birthday and the
city's founder, Grand Duke Gediminas. As Lucy Ashe found, his legacy and some of
his big ideas live on in the city today. Like most medieval rulers memorialised
in stone or bronze, Grand Duke Gediminas towers over Vilnius' main square,
wearing full battle dress, but he's holding his sword by the blade at a strange
and unwarlike angle. He was a very tolerant man, explains my guide Lucas. He
didn't want to fight. Faced with aggressive Teutonic knights, Gediminas
preferred diplomacy, but he didn't always have a choice. His much-quoted letter
is a masterful piece of 14th century PR. Addressed to the Pope and people in
cities across the Holy Roman Empire, he invited monks, craftsmen and merchants
to settle in his new city. He promised them tax breaks and the right to practice
their trade and faith without restrictions. Lithuania was not hostile to
Christians, the Grand Duke promised. He built churches for the newcomers,
hinting he might even get baptised himself, but that was just a ploy. He stuck
to the religion of his ancestors. Lithuania was the last pagan state in Europe,
repelling the crusaders who wanted to convert the locals. People in the north-
west of the country were still worshipping groves of oak, sacred streams and
holy lakes well into the 15th century. I'm reminded of this at the curtain
raiser for Vilnius's celebrations. One of the country's most famous artists,
Emilia Scarnalidie, has turned the glass-fronted opera and ballet theatre into
something resembling an aquarium for her performance piece about life at the
bottom of the ocean. Lasers and smoke turn the theatre's grand 1970s-style
chandeliers into jellyfish. Choir singers in black hoods lean over the
balconies, emitting ghostly groans. As her film is screened, Emilia herself lies
on stage, waving her glittering tail to the sound of live harp music. Her
mermaid is no Disney character, more mutant torpedo, half-woman, half-fish, she
tells me in a cafe the following morning. In an earlier project, she donned a
carbon-fibre monofin to swim through the tunnels of an abandoned submarine base
inside the Arctic Circle. The water was only four degrees. I could have died,
she says matter-of-factly. She says she wanted to confront the myth of war with
a counter-myth of nature. For me, Emilia embodies something of this country's
spirit of bravery and disdain for conformity. Lithuanians not only resisted
Christianity for longer than their neighbours, centuries later they also held
out against Moscow. More recently, while parts of Eastern Europe succumbed to
China's economic blandishments, its much-vaunted Belt and Road Initiative,
Lithuania bucked the trend. It incurred the fury of Beijing after opening a
trade office in Taipei, and it's emerged as one of Taiwan's most outspoken
allies. As for Russia, Lithuania is sandwiched between the heavily-armed enclave
of Kaliningrad and Belarus, now also a de facto military base of Moscow's. The
Deputy Foreign Minister, Mantas Adomenas, tells me it all feels a bit like
Vienna in the midst of the Cold War. It's become a haven for those fleeing
oppression. For the first three decades after the collapse of communism,
Lithuania suffered an exodus to the West, young people left in search of work
and a higher standard of living. Nearly a million citizens went overall, a
quarter of them to Britain. Now, many are returning. Just like the medieval
Grand Duke Gediminas, Vilnius's mayor, Emigius Šumaršš, is keen to attract
talent to his city, both Lithuanians and foreigners. He may no longer need quite
so many blacksmiths, wheelers, furriers, monks or millers, but the IT and
biotech sectors are hungry for specialists. On my last night, I watched concerts
in Cathedral Square as purple and red lights bounce off Gediminas's slanting
sword. The mayor tells me he finds Gediminas's 700-year-old letter inspiring.
We're still open to the world and respectful of others, he says. He proudly
talks about the city's tourism campaign with a risque slogan cooked up by some
advertising students. Vilnius, you're told on billboards and online, is the
G-spot of Europe. Nobody knows where it is, but when you find it, it's amazing.
Lucy Ash, now back from Lithuania. And that's all for this edition of the
programme. I'm Pascale Harter, the producer was Polly Hope, and we'll be back
with more of the stories behind the global news headlines next weekend. For more
from our own correspondent here on the BBC World Service. The male dominance of
the administration of the sport kept women's surfing from growing. The men were
angry, they thought it was a joke, but then Margot Obert placed ahead of a
couple men. Now I'm travelling from California to Hawaii to meet up with some of
the people who were part of that revolution, as well as some of today's top surf
stars. I think all the girls from nowadays have no idea what it was like back
then. Women pro surfers battling the waves at bbcworldservice.com slash
documentaries or wherever you get your podcasts. On this week's cultural
frontline, artists at the forefront of the artificial intelligence revolution.
Holly Herndon on creating her musical AI digital twin, Holly Plus. It's a really
interesting way to be able to play with identity and kind of shape shifting
identity play is what I like to call it. Why a chatbot named Alex is challenging
theatre makers and audiences and retelling African stories through AI. That's
coming up on the cultural frontline. BBC News with Neil Nunes. After more than a
decade of negotiations, the countries of the United Nations have agreed the
first ever treaty to protect the world's oceans that lie outside national
boundaries. Environmental groups say it'll help reverse marine biodiversity
losses and ensure sustainable development. China has announced a reduced
economic growth target of about 5% at the start of its annual parliamentary
session in Beijing. The economy grew by just 3% last year, well on the target,
under pressure from strict COVID containment policies. Israel's seen the largest
protests so far against the government's planned judicial reforms. Up to 200,000
people took to the streets with flags and banners for the ninth Saturday in a
row. There were some clashes in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem. Congress in Ecuador has
voted overwhelmingly to open an internal investigation on corruption allegations
against President Guillermo Lasso. The vote's non-binding, but it could
eventually lead to impeachment proceedings. At least five people have been
injured in Peru after the security forces opened fire against indigenous
protesters in the southern city of Houli. Local media say the demonstrators had
encircled a group of soldiers and police officers. Iran says it's prepared to
give UN inspectors greater access to its nuclear facilities. An official said
the Iranian authorities had also agreed to install surveillance cameras. But
Western diplomats have warned that Tehran has previously failed to live up to
similar promises. And the French football star Kylian Mbappe has become the top
goal scorer in the history of his club, Paris Saint-Germain. He scored his 200th
and first goal near the end of PSG's victory over Nantes on Saturday. That's the
latest BBC World News. Hello, I'm Tina Tehilly. Welcome to The Cultural
Frontline, the programme that explores the world we live in through the work and
voices of artists. On this week's programme, we meet creatives at the forefront
of the AI revolution. Coming up, Holly Herndon tells us about how her AI digital
twin called Holly Plus is expanding her own musical range. If I feed her a score
with text and music, she can sing in German, Spanish, Catalan, languages that I
can't even speak. And Piotr Mirowski tells us about a chatbot called Alex who's
challenging improvised theatre actors. That chatbot is listening onto the
conversations happening on stage and providing a response. That response does
not always make sense. But the improvisers have to do their job. The improvisers
have to use it because that's what improv is about. More from Piotr and Alex
later in the programme. Recently, there's been an explosion of interest in the
role of artificial intelligence, particularly since the arrival of a new
generation of AI-powered chatbots like Google Bard, Dolly 2 and OpenAI's
ChatGPT, which is reportedly the fastest-growing consumer app of all time. A
chatbot is a computer programme designed to have written and spoken
conversations with us over the internet as if they were a real person and to
help us to solve problems. Some AI programmes can even generate the chapter of a
novel, paint a portrait or write a poem in the style of William Shakespeare. But
it's left many questioning the impact this technology could have on artists and
audiences. Is AI just another tool for artists to use or could it transform the
artistic landscape and even replace artists as we know them? Well, two artists
who are using AI in their works are Jeremai Ikongio and Dr Melissa Ochoko-Alela.
Jeremai is a Nigerian artist based between Lagos and Berlin. In 2019, he
generated a series of portraits constructed by an AI algorithm to generate new
works based on the style of the late Nigerian modernist painter Uche Okeke.
Jeremai has since gone on to develop his own AI web application, AfroDreams, to
create a mix of contemporary and traditional images. Dr Melissa Ochoko-Alela is
a lecturer at the Technical University of Kenya in Nairobi and founder and
animator at Leso Immersive Studios. She's been exploring how emerging
technologies like virtual reality and AI, including ChatGPT, can be used to
retell African stories in an authentic way. She's created a VR project called
Cigana to explore how these emerging technologies can be used to digitise
African stories. Melissa told me more about ChatGPT and how she's been using it.
ChatGPT, it's already trained on thousands of stories from all over the world.
You're interacting with a piece of technology and it sounds like a person. The
range of what it can say is so wide. We think of it as a kind of the
storyteller's brain. It reminds me of a story that my grandmother would tell me
as a child. A story that her grandmother told her when she was a little girl.
There's an avatar at the heart of this project, which is all about African
storytelling. Can you tell us more about the actual stories that are told
through it? Our avatar, she's a virtual being. She's called Nawino, so she has a
name. The user would interact via an interface whereby they input some
information. The virtual storyteller will prompt them. In Swahili we say,
Hadithi, Hadithi, which means story come. The audience is supposed to respond
and say, Hadithi njo, or let the story come. The next part would be the system
asks you some information about who you are. If you're a child, if you're an
older person, then that information goes into the prompt as well. You can then
move on to a stage where you select elements of story that you want. The
characters, where the story is happening, the location, the time of day. In the
back end, we have a prompt that is then being generated and being sent into the
language model. In this case, we're using Chachaputis just to test this idea.
And what comes back to us is then a fully fleshed story that was based on the
inputs coming in from the storyteller's end and also from the user's end. So
she's able to respond appropriately, both vocally and also in her animations.
Would you like me to tell you a story? Jazzyganaganwa. The stories that we've
told are chunked in groups of three. The first one that we've showcased has
three stories in it. One is a story of a famous legend from Western Kenya. It's
called Luanda Magere. There is a popular fable across Africa. This is the fable
of why tortoise is a broken shell. And then the third story is a myth of a
specific volcanic lake in Western Kenya called Simbinyaima. So our story tries
to capture that in the VR space. Why is this important to you, keeping African
storytelling alive through these three stories that you've chosen? So I
personally, I love telling and listening to stories. I grew up in stories. It
therefore troubles me that so many of the stories remain largely unknown,
particularly by the younger people. We've become very much accustomed to, it's
almost like the norm, that a Western storytelling approach. And several years
ago, when I was doing this as just essentially research, my PhD research, I was
unable to find a voice that was representative of this region of East Africa. So
I was using a very popular tool back then, and they have a speech-to-text
service. And with the speech-to-text, the system struggled, first of all, to
understand me. On the text-to-speech, I couldn't find a voice variant that was
anywhere near an East African voice sample. And what about representation of the
colours of the continent? Regarding the colours, there seemed to be a default to
colours that were associated with African people. So if in your prompt you did
not explicitly state what colours should be in the scene, there was just shades
of yellow and red and blue. It defaults to a white person. So you can't specify
the ethnicity of the person you're generating. And it's important for me that we
also imbue those digital experiences with our own lived experiences. And the
tools that exist right now are ripe for being able to express our stories in a
way that gives them authenticity and are pretty much similar to how the stories
are told in live telling. Jeremiah, you've also been drawing on the rich art
history of East Africa in your experiments with AI. You originally used an image
generator called Deep Dream to generate portraits based on the Nigerian
modernist, Uche Okeke. Uche was influenced by an ancient East African art style
called Uli art. What were the results and why did you decide to go on to create
your own AI web app, AfroDreams? So I wanted to create the AfroDreams AI web app
for our generation because I was interested in exploring art and technology,
make something that was a lot more regional, that was diverse, and that was
incorporating of the styles that are closer to me. So AfroDream uses a machine
learning algorithm called Generative Adversarial Networks, GANs, to generate
images from another image. And Uli art is a traditional form of Nigerian art
from the Southeast and Southwest that is characterized by abstract geometric
designs. Sometimes they are representative of the life forms that are around,
like trees, like plants, and utensils from the home, like chairs, like pots.
After colonialism, of course, a lot of this art was lost and a lot of people
stopped practicing them. And this was how Uche Okeke for me is a very, very
pioneering artist because he was very much instrumental in the revival of Uli
art and its incorporation into contemporary art practices. But one thing that
has been quite important for me while working with AI is the ethical use of
data. A lot of the time, most of these data sets accumulated through data
scraping. Data scraping involves the use of automated tools to collect
information from websites, including images, text, sound. In the context of art,
data scraping just pulls off people's art styles or images. It doesn't
necessarily take a high resolution of the image, but artists should be aware of
this. I know some artists do take steps to protect their work or limiting access
to the images, but still, there's so much you can do in this time and age to
guard your work because if someone really wants to take your work from your
website, they're just going to make a screen grab. I actively try to avoid using
other people's work in my art without permission. And Melissa, what about you?
What are your thoughts when it comes to the ethical problems, especially when AI
art is being commercialised and monetised? The ideal, of course, is to find a
balance between people getting compensated whenever the work is used to train a
model. Of course, that is proving to be challenging to implement, but that is
like the ideal scenario. Style is not copyrightable, unfortunately. Style is
something that you can mimic even just by drawing with your hand. In developing
my practice over the years, the moments you go through where you literally try
to recreate what looks like a style that was developed by somebody else that you
admire. And it's never thought about as having some kind of, like it's an
ethical problem there. It's just seen as a process of learning and of working
towards finding or honing or coming up with your own unique art style. On the
flip side are people who are not as excited about this, who are very angry and
they feel that a lot of human skill or things that were previously done by a
person are quickly going to be done by machines. Machines will replace humans,
machines will replace copywriters, machines will make humans so reliant on
themselves that instead of writing a job application letter, you will just jump
into chatty PT and try to do application letter without doing all that heavy
lifting. And then there's also the idea of representation. The systems are
inherently biased and reflect the realities of their creators. What about the
other people who are outside of that group? But then the potentials for
application are immense. From entertainment to healthcare, there's just so many
ways in which such a service can be implemented. So we are at an interesting
point in time. Dr Melissa Ochoco-Alela and Jeremiah Ikongio. Broadcasting
worldwide, I'm Tina Dehealy, and this is the Cultural Frontline on the BBC World
Service. AI and theatre might seem like an unlikely pairing, but Swedish drama
director Jenny Elving and Polish science researcher Piotr Morawski are two
members of the creative team behind the AI experimental theatre company
Improbotics. Based across Europe and Canada and performing internationally, the
cast of spontaneous improvisers are pushed to their creative limits as they have
to quickly react to AI-generated lines from an on-stage chatbot programme called
ALEKS, which stands for Artificial Language Experiment. Now, the chatbot-
generated lines are either delivered by a robot on stage or to one of the actors
via an earpiece, who are then expected to perform them convincingly. Jenny
joined me down the line from Stockholm, and I was joined in the studio by Piotr,
who told me how their new show works. Our show is basically a mixture of many
things. There is a bit of tech, a lot of comedy, and there is a lot of
unexpected. We are improvising, but one of the cast members is guided by AI.
They get all the lines via a headphone coming from a chatbot, and that chatbot
is listening onto the conversations happening on stage and providing a response.
That response does not always make sense, but the improvisers have to use it,
because that's what improv is about. Hey! Do you two have something to hide from
me? No, no, no, no, no, no, we're not hiding. Are you doing something fishy
right now? No, no, no, I would never as a student. I would never. That's not
what's happening here in the cave. Good, good. I just wanted to check. I would
not have come to see you without a reason. See? We wouldn't have come down here
without a reason. We were just checking the connections. Michael thinks that
each of these servers is a creature and they're connected through the umbilical
cords that are the cables that connect them. You can say whatever you want. I
have no idea what you're talking about. LAUGHTER I love you. LAUGHTER Michael,
is that why we're down here in the server room? It's a true thing. LAUGHTER So
how does the programming of the chatbot work on stage? How are the lines
generated? Who feeds them back to the robot or to the actors? So we have
programmed the chatbot before the show. However, during the show, we prompt it.
So we provide the context of what the scene is about. And then as people speak
on stage, someone types what they say. After a few seconds, the chatbot comes
with an answer, or actually multiple answers. So there's a human in the loop who
looks at those answers and picks the best one. Once they click on it, it sends
the radio to the performer. So that's basically the human performer who's
wearing headphones and who can only say lines generated by AI. Yenni, let's come
to you next. As an actor and playwright, what opportunities did AI offer you
that traditional theatre couldn't? Well, I was immediately intrigued by the idea
of combining tech and art. Using the new elements of an AI provides us with a
new level of chaos, I think, and risk and unpredictability. It made me a better
improviser. I also have to feel the lines of dialogue with emotions, with
subtext, and with action. Piotr, can you explain a bit more about the AI
chatbot? How do they work? When we started the project in 2015, 2016, we needed
to have some form of chatbot. That chatbot would be powered by a language model.
So that language model is something that predicts what words come next, given
the context of the previous words. So, for instance, if I say, I am going to
the, a language model could predict beach. That language model is what enables
the chatbot to generate text. At the beginning, the most likely choice to have a
good language model for improv was to use dialogue from films and teach to the
program what patterns of words happen in language. In 2018, 2019, some of those
language models that were coming up, one of them was called GPT-2, were trained
on much more than just a billion words, which is what you would find in the
dialogue from these 100,000 films. They would be trained on 100 billion words.
Pretty much everything on the internet that included conversations. So I think
Alex is ready to take any question from you. And what Alex is, and what the
listeners can imagine, is a little robot about 40 centimetres high, and it's
remotely controlled from a laptop that connects with a chatbot. OK, so can I ask
a question? Yes, please. Alex, are you excited to be here? Without a doubt. I
love being here. OK. I'm super excited. What are Piotr's best attributes? Alex,
I hope you're being kind with me. We perform a comedy show, so it's very natural
for us. I think that comedy is a man-made concept. We're just acting according
to pre-programmed variables. Wow. OK. You can also, instead of going with
questions, we can go straight with statements. OK. There's a spacecraft
approaching us at high speed. I am experiencing a lot of emotions right now. OK.
AI is evolving all the time, so presumably the chatbot responses could become
less absurdist and more grounded in reality. How could this affect your show, do
you think, and how do you see it changing as tech becomes more intelligent? When
we started out, we had a lot of scenes in dungeons and getting the sword of our
master and things like that, because that's what the AI gave us, and then it
evolved. I think the comedy will always be there. The humor happens a lot in the
subtext and in the interaction between the players. If the AI becomes too
boring, we'll probably find ways to make it entertaining and to give us ideas
anyway. There's concern, as I'm sure you know, about AI replacing actual people,
humans, and whilst it's highly unlikely that AI will start to replace actors on
stage, it could be used to generate scripts, for example. What are your thoughts
on this? Is that something we should embrace or be wary about? I think we should
be, at the same time, cautious and also curious. So there are possibilities that
could be offered by AI as a tool for co-creation, which could be useful, but
only if they happen on our own terms and conditions, which is why AI ethics is
such an important field today. Piotr Mierowski and Jenny Elving from
Improbotics. US artist Holly Herndon works with computer software and AI to
create innovative music, songs and sounds, and she has a PhD in composition from
Stanford University's Center for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics. She's
been working on new ways of exploring her voice and she's created what she
refers to as her digital computer twin called Holly Plus. Holly Plus can sing
melodies in a number of languages and styles using Holly's original voice. She
told the Cultural Frontline's Andrea Kidd what interested her about using AI and
machine learning in her music. Well, Holly Plus is basically my digital identity
or a kind of version of my digital identity. We all experience this through
things like social media. There are kind of like digital versions of ourselves
that are kind of pieces of ourselves. I think this will become even more
pronounced with the advent of AI, being able to create models of oneself and
then create animations of oneself. That's what we've been working on with Holly
Plus. So you can use machine learning to create a visual model of someone's
visual likeness or in Holly Plus's case, it's a vocal likeness. So I trained
Holly Plus on about three hours of my raw singing. So it's a really interesting
way to be able to play with identity and kind of shape shifting and identity
play is what I like to call it. I grew up in East Tennessee, so I grew up in the
shadow of Dolly Parton and Dolly Wood. So she's always been a bit of a hero for
me. So it was a huge honor to perform a cover of one of her greatest hits,
Jolene. I worked with an amazing team in Barcelona called Vox Pro Labs, and they
are some of the brightest and best at vocal synthesis. And so we trained the
algorithm on my natural singing voice. And now if I feed her a score with text
and music notes, she can sing in German, Spanish, Catalan, a total of about like
seven or eight different languages. Languages that I can't even speak or didn't
even have to train on. She sings in perfect pitch every time. It's really
complicated runs that I can't do myself. But also we have a real time
instrument, which is really fun. So someone can sing through my voice in real
time. And this is something that I presented at TED last year and something that
I think really hammers home the new paradigm that this opens up when you can in
real time perform as someone else. So say a deep male vocal will sing into a
microphone and then out comes something that is truly my voice in real time. So
just imagining all the different kind of things that can unlock. Of course, the
first thing that my mind goes to is karaoke, like we could all then sing Beyonce
songs in Beyonce's actual voice. We can share and be really playful with our
identities with one another. But the really important aspect of this is that
it's consensual because, you know, we've all seen the kind of deep fakes online.
That stuff can be really funny and interesting, but at the end of the day, it's
really important when we're dealing with people's identity that it's consensual.
And so the Holly Plus project, the idea that we came up with is we created a
kind of collective, a group of people who kind of steward the voice. And we work
on different projects together. And then we kind of share in profit splits if
we're licensing something. And so with this whole exciting time for machine
learning right now, that's one of the key things that I think we're going to see
coming up over and over again. You've made a version of Holly Plus available so
people can effectively use the software and use your voice. So are you concerned
how they might use the digital you? There are multiple versions of Holly Plus.
So the very natural singing voice version that can actually pronounce words
clearly, that version has not been released to the public because I'm still kind
of trying to figure out how I want to deal with certain words that I don't want
my voice to say. The version that I have released to the public is a more kind
of vocal production sound version. And what you do is you drag an audio file
onto the browser and it will convert any sample that you put in there into a
kind of chorus of Holly singing. Because it's not just the human voice that you
are reproducing. You're also using software to change your voice into a flute or
a violin or any other instrument. Well, exactly. So not only can you model
someone's unique idiosyncratic voice like I've done with Holly Plus, but you can
also model a violin and then I can sing as a violin. So I produced a song for
Maria Arnal, who's a really wonderful Catalan vocalist. And I produced the song
Alcante Sibilia. And so I turned her voice into a flute and a violin in multiple
points throughout the song. A really interesting transfer of the timbre of one
sound onto the performance of another. Imagine if you're really able to allow
your voice to be any kind of instrument that you could dream up. And it doesn't
even have to have the physics of this earth. It could be a tuba the size of your
city or whatever, you know. The possibilities are endless. And so I think then
the performances and the styles and the genres that will come out of that I
think are also endless, which is exciting. Holly Herndon. That's it for this
week. But for more arts and culture on the BBC World Service, do check out the
Arts Hour, where Nikki Bady talks to two of the Best Picture Oscar nominees,
director of Tar, Todd Field, and Ruben Ostlund, director of Triangle of Sadness.
And don't forget, there are many more global artists always available on the
Cultural Frontline podcast. Just search for us via your favourite podcast app
and subscribe. We'll be here same time next week with more stories of artists
changing the world and the way we see it. Until then, goodbye..