TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-16H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 For me it was never all about the Russians. My parents first took me to the
theatre when I was three and three quarters. When I was ten my dad built a
theatre in our garden where me and my friends put on plays. And so what do you
do? You realise you have to build a suit of armour to stop you selling out.
Commitment to the working class, faith in the ultimate victory of socialism, the
certainty that you hold the key to human history. And the belief that anything
that can actually be achieved in the here and now is a kind of betrayal of the
radiant post-revolutionary future. So what do I do? You move to Bradford where
you become the writer for a small left-wing agitprop theatre group performing
Marxist plays to workers in struggle. Like I've made my theory my practice? Yes.
In Bradford? Yes, Bradford, which for reasons best known to itself has won the
North of England franchise for the late 60s counterculture and which plays host
to a veritable garden of exotic theatrical flowers during the two immensely
successful Bradford festivals of 1970 and 1971. Performance artists careering
around the city on pink bicycles ridden in aeronautic display formation. Howard
Brenton's play about Scot of the Antarctic being performed in the city's ice
rink, with myself assaying the small but nonetheless significant role of God. A
pagan child's naming ceremony with fire eaters and real goats in the city's wool
exchange. While a small, stern Marxist theatre troupe called the General Will is
presenting a series of agitational plays which will chart what was effectively a
mass uprising by the industrial working class against the 1970-74 Conservative
government led by Edward Heath. The plays have heavily ironical titles like The
National Interest and The Dunkirk Spirit. The last play opens as the government
imposes a three-day working week on all of British industry to try and defeat
the second miners' strike in two years. The Prime Minister calls a general
election on the question of who governs Britain. He loses by a whisker. And we
think if he'd won what would the government, the police, the army have actually
had to do to defeat the miners and their allies? And you're producing plays.
We're producing agit-prop drama for working class audiences. And the form? Form?
I'd say cartoon documentary. Oh, form! The group favours the documentary
approach because so much information is not presented at all in the overground
media. For instance, the number of factory sit-ins and occupations which have
occurred since 1971. We list 60 in state of emergency. So it's not about the
art? No, we're more concerned with what the shows say than with the aesthetics
of how they say it. And what they say isn't about how the personal relates to
the political or prefiguring how a better world might be or even... Look, the
Vietnam War's raging and guess what? Here, faced with the most determined
assault on its rights since the general strike, the working class appears to be
behaving just like Marx and Lenin said it would. So, no, this actually isn't the
time for prefiguring a better future or crawling over audiences with no clothes
on. Or, for that matter, wrapping on about whether there's such a thing as a
vaginal orgasm. It's for supporting the vanguard of the proletariat in what
looks increasingly like a battle for state power. And you don't think all this
might sound just a teeny bit self-righteous from someone who, of course, might
become a successful professional playwright? And who thinks that women's
liberation is a distraction from the real struggle? I think it might be a
distraction now. And that the General Will Theatre Group will be taken over by a
faction of its membership in what you'll call a gay putsch? So, 42 years later,
I'll go back to Bradford to find out how a dispute within a tiny theatre group
in the north of England was actually a microcosm of a struggle which was to tear
the left apart. Whether the politics of the personal, feminism, gay rights, were
indeed a distraction from the working class struggle, or the most important
thing that was going on. So, this is the story of your life, is it? A dispute
which began when the only gay member of the company stepped out on stage in the
middle of a performance. And he whipped out his equity card and said, as the
only equity card carrying member of the General Will, I'm going on strike
because I'm being oppressed. Which itself provoked protest from the Bradford
women's group. Hang on a minute. Why is it going to be a gay company? Why isn't
it a feminist company? But the important thing, which I hadn't known about at
all, was that neither of these things actually happened. What did happen was
that the General Will issued a call to the alternative arts community of
Bradford. There were a lot of Bradford-based gay people, a lot of working class
gay men and women who became involved in theatre. What actually happened was the
working class took over the General Will Theatre Company. We didn't expect them
to be lesbians. And what will I be doing? Writing a play about the National
Front. For the General Will? For the Royal Shakespeare Company. Right on. And
what's this Royal Shakespeare Company play saying? That for all its claims to
the contrary, the National Front was led by and was a front for actual Nazis.
But, hey, doesn't everyone think that? Which was by no means the prevailing
wisdom at the time. The play is picketed by an offshoot of the National Front
who attacks the audience with Union Jacks. Then it goes on television where it's
excellently reviewed by Dennis Potter. It makes your... My? Our career. So we're
in our 60s? Over 70. Wow. Still smoking? No. But cooler glasses? More expensive
glasses. So are you thinking what I'm thinking? Well that's the question.
Because as the 70s go on you'll decide that your future is with a different
audience. Not workers in struggle but the people who are actually coming to your
plays. You, I, we will understand what we should have learnt at Bradford. That
politics is wider than Marx and Lenin thought it was. That it expands outwards
to the planet and inward to the person and his or her identity. I wrote with a
friend called Tess Gill a book called Women's Rights. A practical guide that was
published by Penguin. We were looking at all the rights that women did and
didn't have. So what have we got and what do we need? And Anna finds that when
the second edition of the book was published they had to almost completely
rewrite it. Because so many rights had been won. Could you read these out
please? The Sex Discrimination Act. Tick. Women able to get mortgages and loans
in their own right. Tick. Equal rights to serve on juries. Equal pension rights.
Tick. The Abortion Act which gave women the right to choose. Tick. In other
words, real achievements in the here and now. But hey, I'm writing plays for the
Royal Shakespeare Company. But you'll also write a column on the far right press
for an anti-fascist investigative journal. You'll be a founder member of the
anti-Nazi league. You'll do meetings up and down the country. You'll be the most
politically active you'll ever be. And the truth is, probably, most of this
would not have happened if you hadn't moved into the mainstream. Please don't
tell me I go into movies. Not yet. Move to London? Not on the bucket list so
far. I don't get a sodding MBE. You don't get a sodding MBE. For services to
selling out. For services to anything. So, what's a bucket list? On the 3rd of
May 1979, you'll be in New York, listening to a live relay of the Radio 4
coverage of the general election result. And the sophologists will refer to the
collapsing National Front vote as the fascist vote. And you'll feel we've won.
Wild. And have we? We've won that. But we haven't seen, we haven't understood,
what else is happening. What am I doing in New York? You're doing what anybody
does in a foreign country. You're discovering your own. In 1976, the
bicentennial year of the United States, the British government decides to bestow
gifts on a grateful American people. Among them is a scheme to send 25 British
artists to the States for a year to do pretty much what they like, perhaps in
revenge for the Boston Tea Party. I arrive in November 1978, connect myself to
the Manhattan Theatre Club, and spend much of the subsequent 12 months
challenging the prevailing myths about the land of the free. Myth 1. Americans
don't like queuing. Bollocks. In fact, they queue all the time. Particularly in
banks, you can wait an hour to cash some money or buy travellers' cheques. In
Britain, there'd be riots. Myth 2. Americans are straight talkers. Baloney. They
have a talent for obfuscation, circumlocution and euphemism which would render
them the envy of the imperial court of Byzantium. It is, after all, in America
where I first see the sign... Thank you for not smoking. An order posing as a
courtesy. Which major credit card will you be using? A rule posing as an
enquiry. Your cooperation is much appreciated. An instruction posing as a
prediction implying a threat. All of which I write down in my journal, along
with witty aphorisms like... America. The only country in the world to pass from
barbarism to decadence without an intervening period of civilisation. And I read
it now and I think what a patronising pompous prick I was. Thanks. Particularly
as the journal lists the people who showered me with friendship, help and
hospitality. People of the left who I want to engage with about what had
happened in the 60s. But also people on the other side, from traditional
Republicans to disillusioned working class Democrats to born again Christians.
Who appear to be forging an alarmingly effective coalition to bring the right to
power. The most surprising element of this coalition being found not in the
South or the West, but in New York. Among a group of former communist and
Trotsky intellectuals, collectively dubbed the Neo-Conservatives. Who like to
describe themselves as liberals mugged by reality. And as I pack up to come
home, I know what the next play has to be about. So, how's it going? How's what
going? This play you're writing about people abandoning their ideals and moving
to the right. Is it working? What do you mean is it working? I mean, I assume
you're writing this because you're scared that it might happen to you. Isn't
that right, Uncle? And then I'm watching television and I recognise a voice. I
think that I was very idealistic, I think I was quite naive. I think I did feel
I was missing out on a good life and also not achieving very much in so doing.
Dave Clark. I think anyone who hasn't dissociated to 20 doesn't really have much
of a heart. And anyone who's still one at 40 probably doesn't have much of a
head. Are you attracted to Thatcherism? Yes, I am. And I think if that can
happen to Dave Clark, is it all over? Game's up? Thatcher's won? Where there is
discord, may we bring harmony. Where there is error, may we bring truth. And she
emasculates the trades unions and sells off council houses and Labour goes down
to its worst electoral defeat since 1918. And women set up the peace camp at
Greenham Common. And the UK still has a stockpile of over 100 operational
nuclear warheads and four Trident submarines. The left takes over the Greater
London Council. Which Mrs Thatcher abolishes in 1984. The year the miners go on
strike. Oh hey, the miners riding to the rescue. So all around there's struggle
going on. It's just not you doing the struggling. Christ, I hope I don't end up
being you. I'm sorry. In 1984, I'm 36. And yes, I am pursuing different aims
with different ambitions. And my life takes a different course. Get married. Buy
a house. Take out a mortgage. Possess a tagine. Have a West End hit. Lay down a
little wine. Have a Broadway hit. Grow a beard. Give up smoking. And beat all of
George Eliot, even Romola. Write the lyrics for the B-side of a hit single.
Stick together to protect ourselves. And negotiate the first union agreement for
British playwrights still in force today. Join the Labour Party. Run a committee
room in five local elections. See my wife Eve elected as the first ever Labour
councillor for our ward. And then? Found a postgraduate course in playwriting.
Become a professor. Write for the London Review of Books. And for the future. Be
on any questions. Compete in Christmas University Challenge. Get invited onto
Desert Island Discs. Street Fighting Man. Subterranean Homesick Blues. Keep
Imagine. Debate at the Oxford Union. Dining in college. Living in a cathedral
close. Or Tuscany. Or in Cornwall by the sea. Delete Street Fighting Man. Insert
Fantasia on a theme by Thomas Tallis. Hey, why not keep Imagine? Run for public
office. Go to a war zone. Devote a whole year to a political campaign. Make
something happen. Prevent something happening. In July 1997 my wife Eve is
diagnosed with lung cancer. She dies the following March. She told her sons, now
my sons, Sean and Nigel, she wanted me to find someone else, as indeed I do.
Steph is a playwright. We write two plays together. One of them a community play
for the people of Dorchester. She was on the first women's demonstration against
Trump. She's angrier than I am. You could argue that she lives her politics more
than I do now. Or perhaps I ever have. Don't eat anything with a face. Or
containing palm oil. Or anywhere that is or is owned by McDonald's. Fighting the
next battles in the culture war. The war that began with stopping censorship and
hanging, expanding civil liberties and gaining women's and gay rights. The war
we're winning. I'm joined now from Balmoral by our correspondent Andrew Cassidy.
A month after Eve is diagnosed, we're turning out of the car park of a hotel in
Oxford where we'd stayed the night. We turn on the car radio and hear someone
talking sepulchrally about what was obviously a dead royal. Ah, we think, that's
the Queen Mother. And a week later we watch Diana's funeral. The royal family
not knowing what the hell had hit them. Hyde Park full of a rainbow nation, old,
young, black, white, gay, straight. The victors in the culture war. The way the
applause after Earl Spencer's speech rolled into Westminster Abbey like thunder
from the streets. A floral revolution like Greenham, like Prague in 1989, like
San Francisco in 1967. And thinking about other funerals that became acts of
rebellion and defiance. Steve Biko in South Africa, the night time funerals in
Gaza. And actually that strange alliance between jet-set celebrity and the
wretched of the earth which gave us Live Aid. Which my son, Sean, attends. It's
a gas and for me it's actually a celebration of collective action. Of people
working together for the good of others, for all mankind. Like the Free Mandela
concert would be. An affirmation actually of the importance of charity. Because
actually that's where you start. I can't do this. I mean, for Christ's sake.
Mandela. Are you okay? Okay, so Steve Biko is the same as Diana. Look, maybe,
should we talk about this later? No, actually no. We can't talk about this
later. Live Aid, a triumph for international socialism. I mean, wasn't it
actually just like 30 multi-millionaires in the greatest act of virtue signal in
history? And I'm sorry but you can't say little yellow people. Or girls passing
hands across men's brows or mankind, for Christ's sake. And I don't know if this
is right, was the National Front defeated by your play? No, I obviously didn't.
And if this is a play, then what is its point? And who is it for? Sorry, I... So
Diana, and we won the... Please forgive me for a second. Look, look. No, no, no,
no, I'm not saying. No, of course. For Christ's sake, feminism was a
distraction. No, yes. No, I mean, do you want a medal for not thinking that
anymore? That's if you don't mean... Well, as I said... Oh, let's just unpick,
we won the culture war. Let's just unpick we and won. And what about the war
that you lost? What war? You're a baby boomer, right? And you're probably
sitting on a million quids worth of prime real estate. But woohoo, you won gay
rights. What war? What? What war? You said the war you lost. I mean the war that
was waged against me. Hashtag the working class in struggle. For Christ's sake,
I don't need charity, yeah? I need a Redfries. Yes. Right, so are you going to
answer it then? Yes. What are you going to answer? What? Why your generation
voted Brexit while all around you there's struggle going on? Yes, I'll answer
it. Well, how the hell do I get out of here? Sorry. And yes, while the culture
war was being won, if indeed won it was, we lost the other war. The war against
what had first been called monetarism, then thatterism, then neoliberalism and
now austerity. And then there was the crash and for the next ten years real
incomes went down and debt climbed, particularly for people in their 20s and
their 30s. And yes, of course, there were the Occupy protests, but actually for
eight years nobody in politics, in mainstream politics, was putting forward an
alternative. And in the end if you don't put forward an alternative then someone
else will. Can I ask you to imagine something, that you're a graduate working in
the public sector or the creative industries, maybe the sort of person who likes
to go to the theatre of an evening or listen to Radio 4. Do you agree or
disagree with the following propositions? So, immigration is a benefit, not a
burden to society. Yes or no? Shout it out, people like you if you haven't said
it. So yes, tick. And the freer the market, the freer the people. Yeah, cross.
Civil liberties are just as important as national security. Easy. Yes, tick. Oh,
and corporations and rich people should pay less tax. I'd say so. Cross. So it's
tick, cross, tick, cross. Now I'd like you to imagine you're a dot-com
billionaire or a Hollywood star. So the same immigration question. Immigration,
a benefit or a burden? Yes or no? Come on, all those Hungarian film editors.
Yes, tick. Then the free market being an excellent idea, if you're honest. I
think so, tick. Civil liberties, also a great idea. Certainly, big tick.
Corporations and rich people should pay less tax. This is rich people. Now,
you're a 55-year-old unemployed white plumber in Burnley. Immigration, a
benefit? Cross. Free market, a splendid idea? Cross. Civil liberties, just as
important as national security? Cross. Corporations and rich people should pay
less tax than you. So it's tick, tick, tick, tick versus cross, cross, cross,
cross. A new fault line with economic and social liberalism on one side and
social conservatism and economic intervention on the other, which is why from
Warsaw to Wisconsin, right-wing populist parties have moved their economic
programmes to the left, from Poland's Law and Justice Party embracing welfare
and Nigel Farage suddenly deciding he hates big business to Donald Trump
promising the biggest programme of public works since the 1930s. And why the
majority of my generation voted Brexit. Because they felt let down and left
behind by a magical mystery tour which never arrived. And so the generation that
came of age in the 60s tried to turn the clock back to their childhoods. And of
course, you know all about what Burnley plumbers think of tax and immigration.
No. And Diana died when I was two. Ah. So what have you been doing in my
lifetime? Well, I've... Did you get on any questions? Yes. Christmas university
challenge? We did surprisingly well. Firstly, you've spoken at meetings and
you've written book reviews and articles. And taught. And taught. And you've
done some work with the union. Woo-hoo! Yes, actually. Woo-hoo. And being in a
war zone? No. Devoting a year to a political campaign? Preventing something from
happening? Like Euro-pop-right Brexit Trump? Well, not enough. OK, so I have a
question. If none of this had actually happened, so if the Lehman Brothers had
done a risk assessment... LAUGHTER And if it was still economics nil and culture
cool, fab, far out and right on, and the only thing that your generation
actually did for us was sex, drugs and rock and roll, deep down, would you
really mind? What the only thing the 60s did for us was individual freedom.
Yeah. It's enduring legacy, not socialism, but a renewal of capitalism. Yes. I'd
like to buy the world a Coke. Oh, yes. I'd really mind. What's next? The young
woman takes a pile of cards and hands them to members of the audience. As she
does so, she speaks. Now, imagine this. It's 2049. I am 53. And he's 101. Who
can bear to think.....that any of the following might still not have been
achieved? Can you read out the bits in capitals, please? Manifesto of the Labour
Party 2017. Abolition of university tuition fees, banning of zero-hours
contracts. Kyoto Protocol 1997. The parties shall individually or jointly ensure
that their aggregate carbon dioxide equivalent emissions of the greenhouse gases
listed in Annex A do not exceed their assigned amounts. Manifesto of the Labour
Party 1983. The ending of all forms of academic selection, cancellation of
Trident. John Lennon, Imagine, 1971. Imagine there's no countries. It isn't hard
to do. Programme of the Black Panther Party 1966. We want freedom, we want power
to determine the destiny of our black community. Universal Declaration of Human
Rights 1948. Slavery and the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms.
Equal Rights Amendment 1943. Equality of rights under the law shall not be
denied or abridged by the United States or any state on account of sex. Still
not ratified? Not ratified. Act II, Scene 1, The Tempest, 1611. In the
Commonwealth I would by contraries execute all things. For no kind of traffic,
would I admit, no name of magistrate, riches, poverty and use of service, none.
St. Matthew's Gospel, William Tyndale, New Testament, 1526. Blessed are the
meek, for they shall inherit the earth. To bring about a fundamental and
irreversible shift in balance of power and wealth in favour of working people
and their families. Contract, succession, born, bound of land, tilth, vineyard,
none. We want land, bread, housing, education, clothing, justice and peace. I
would with such perfection govern, sir, to excel the golden age. If this was a
play, this is the ending. Trying It On was written and performed by David Edgar
with Paul Heath and Danielle Phillips. It was originally made with China Plate
Theatre in a production directed by Christopher Hayden and was produced for BBC
Radio 4 by Junkwell Panting. So if this was a play, is this the ending? This is
BBC Radio 4, where we'll be hearing from some of the Ukrainian refugees living
here in the UK in just a moment, after a word from Anita Rani about what's
coming up at four o'clock. On Weekend Woman's Hour today, the actor, singer and
songwriter Cynthia Erivo on playing DCI Odette Raine in the upcoming film
Luther, The Fallen Son. I think she's an amalgamation of different women that
I've met and different people that I know, friends and family. There's the
mother in her and then there's the businesswoman and there's the fighter and
it's all different people that I've met and different people that I know and
then a bit of me, I think. And I think my want to survive as well, I think, is
injected into her. She's kind of brilliant. Listen to Cynthia Erivo and more on
Weekend Woman's Hour today at four. Thanks, Anita. Now on BBC Radio 4,
Ukrainians in Britain, where next? The Ukrainian teacher Olga Rebak speaks to
fellow refugees trying to establish a temporary life in rural Somerset as they
await the end of the war back home. My name is Olga. I'm an English teacher.
This is my husband, Andriy. We are talking about current situation in Ukraine.
He hopes that when he wakes up in the morning he will be able to turn on the
heating. He's at home with our dog, Danny. They are always happy to hear our
voice and I'm very excited to hear them. Andriy is in Ukraine. He is in our
hometown, Ternopil. It's beautiful. It's full of young people, full of children
with lots of green trees and modern buildings. At least this is how I remember
it, because right now I'm not in Ternopil. I'm more than 1,000 miles away in a
different world with our two daughters, Emilia and Melissa. Tonight at 10, we
are live in Ukraine, a country at war after a huge Russian military offensive by
land, sea and air. We have been sitting in the basement for two nights. I
remember how people took turns going outside to take a deep breath, how children
cried and did not understand what was happening. We listened to every sound and
were afraid that a rocket would fly into our shelter or the airport nearby. I
just realized that I need to grab my children and then I need to find a safe
place for them. So we took a decision that I have to cross the border with
children. I grabbed everything I could, some towels, some blankets. I took some
warm clothes and I remember I took even a blender with me because I needed to
make some food for my little one. And at that time she was too young. I didn't
have any idea for how long I would stay abroad. Since May 2022, we have been
staying in Somerset, England. Our amazing hosts are Julia and David. I remember
we met Julia at the airport. She was wearing a very nice yellow coat and she was
smiling at us. And this yellow coat and her smile, so it was like the sun for
us. We came to the village which is called Milverton. And I realized that it's a
very nice and calm place and it was just perfect for us at that moment. I'm
making the icing and we'll put it on the cake. And you can put on a snowman or a
Christmas pudding decoration. Do you know if you can add some more snow? Since
March 2022, more than 110,000 Ukrainians have found safety in this country
through the Ukraine Sponsorship Scheme, a government program better known as
Homes for Ukraine. The government's launching a scheme this week which will pay
you £350 a month to offer a Ukrainian refugee or family a room in your home or
any other property you may own for the next six months. All of this time, they
supported us. It was so amazing. When we came to the room, it was like in a
princess room. Security checks, we'll be able to stay for three years with the
right to work and to those state benefits, as well as having access to public
services. Try to do for us as much as possible. Kind heart, their help for us
from the first day, from the first minute. All these sponsors agreed to host
Ukrainians for a minimum of six months. In many cases, including mine, it's now
been more. The local community here has done so much to make us feel welcome.
We're all Western Somerset. This is Peter, who has been helping to coordinate
local support for Ukrainians. We met in someone's kitchen the first time about
three days after the Homes for Ukraine scheme was announced. I've met lots of
lovely people and what's in many ways are quite small things, creating a welcome
hub where people can meet each other, for our Ukrainian guests who otherwise
could feel very isolated, especially in a rural area. Three times a week they
can meet people from their own country and make friendships with local people
who are wanting to offer a welcome. The very first came in April, but in May and
June a lot of people arrived. What do you need? And people said, we need to
learn English. Luckily we had among the first guests to arrive a qualified
English teacher, Olga, who's sitting with me here, and we were delighted that
you were happy to start providing English lessons. So this is our classroom. We
have lessons three times a week. Let us all together. Dasha, what are you doing?
I am now paid by the local community association to teach English to other
Ukrainians for five hours per week. But so far it's the only work I have found.
A survey of Ukrainians by the Office for National Statistics found that half of
respondents have had difficulty taking up work here. The biggest barriers are
language and our qualifications not being recognized. Many years ago I worked as
a journalist on TV channel and in the newspaper. This is my friend Irina, and
she arrived here with her two children in June. I tried to send my CV in
catering company, and they didn't answer me. Maybe nearly 60, 70 I sent my CV.
It is a little difficult system for us. I agree, I absolutely agree, because
I've done my DBS check twice, because I applied for a job as a teacher assistant
to work with Ukrainians at the local school, but I haven't heard back from them
as well, which is very strange and frustrating. I agree. So I feel you, Irina.
Be patient. Take some time. Hi, Anya! For my neighbors in the village, Anya and
Slava, some of the challenges we are all facing are even bigger, because they
are both deaf. Anya can hear enough to understand me and also translates for
Slava from sign language into Ukrainian. Anya's words are read by an actor. You
have been learning English sign language for some time. Are there big
differences between Ukrainian sign language and English sign language? Of
course, they are very different, like English and Ukrainian, very different. We
don't have deaf people here to communicate with in British sign language, and we
need to communicate with people like us. To meet deaf people, we have to travel
a long way to London or Manchester. My husband would like to add that it's
difficult for him to start from scratch. It's not easy for him here. Everything
is difficult, and he has less optimistic views on life in England. My name is
Ember Solomon, and I'm the chief executive of the Refugee Council. It's very
difficult to imagine what it's like being uprooted so dramatically. People will
arrive with trauma. They'll experience great loss, loss from connection with
family anxiety, huge anxiety we found about family members back in Ukraine. It
impacts on your ability to hold down a job, to work, impacts on your day-to-day
life. We are listening to my mother's and my father's voices. They are on the
phone, and every time I call them, they are very excited and very sad at the
same time. My parents, they miss Melissa very much, and Emilia as well, and
every time they can hear their voices, they start crying. My elder daughter, who
is 14 years old, her English is getting better and better every day, and I am so
proud of them. I always discuss my next steps related to the host house with
Julia and David, and I hope to go back home as soon as possible, but just in
case, if I will have to stay here longer, I would like to find our own
accommodation, of course. It's time to be more independent. From my
conversations with other Ukrainians in the local area and other parts of the
country, I know this is a common feeling. Independence is very important. The
fact that the majority of the people in the UK on the Homes for Ukraine scheme
right now are single women or mothers with children. This is Stan Banish, the
managing director of Opora, a charity that helps Ukrainians settle in the UK.
Having a stable home that you can count on is necessary because it's a base for
everything else. So not being able to find that is a massive drawback. The
issues in terms of employability, in terms of integration, they're all linked
together, but at the core of it, it's having somewhere suitable, safe and stable
to stay for an extended period of time. My name is Dr. Krish Kandaya. I'm the
founder of the Sanctuary Foundation. The next phase, though, having a safe
landing in someone's home is brilliant, but it can't last forever. And having
the dignity of your own front door is really important when it comes to trauma
recovery. You need to be able to choose things in your life. You don't need to
have to ask permission when you use the bathroom or the kitchen. You need that
space to be able to call your own and to be able to be a family together. If we
can help Ukrainians use the skills and gifts they have and get sustainable jobs,
then they won't need help with their housing. They could just rent on the open
market. But because most of our Ukrainian friends can't do that because of
language challenges or recognition of qualifications or they're now solo
parenting, many of our Ukrainian friends need help getting into the housing
sector once their hosting arrangement has come to an end. It's quite challenging
for me to find a home for my family. I am on universal credit, and I don't think
that landlords would like to rent out the house to someone like I am. John Perry
from the Chartered Institute of Housing People on low incomes find it difficult
to access housing in the private rented sector for various reasons. One,
obviously, is the level of rents, which is going up all the time. In some cases,
there's prejudice by landlords against people who depend on benefits. There is
evidence of discrimination by landlords against people who don't hold UK
passports. Anver Solomon from the Refugee Council Ukrainians can access
benefits, housing support, through the benefits system to try and find a
property. Of course, there are still challenges. They don't have what's known as
a rental deposit. If you don't have that deposit, you can't sign the tenancy
agreement. Or they might have unstable employment, or they might have employment
which is in the informal economy. There's still not a smooth transition into
independent living and accommodation for them. The support we are getting now
from the local council or from the government is very important for all of us.
And it's even this universal credit. I even cannot imagine how could I survive
here without this support. We just hope that we will get more options with
housing. I would like to meet and to speak to local council to ask some
questions. And maybe they can help me to find out more about this. I'm Federica
Smith-Roberts and I'm the lead member for Communities at the council. I think
that the biggest challenge that is being faced by yourselves are housing and
being able to move on. And that is a huge challenge locally about being able to
find affordable accommodation. Yes, it's true. Is council housing available to
us Ukrainians? So, we do have social housing in Somerset. You do have, I
believe, rights to access if you were made homeless, for example, when a house
break down. We can look to find homes for you. So, there is access available to
you through those schemes. I have heard that there is such a long waiting list.
Is it true? That is true. There are probably across Somerset, I think 9,000
people on the waiting list for social housing. We have got a housing crisis
across the UK and government do need to step in to help even more than they've
done so already. There are some Ukrainians and some of them are thinking of
going back to Ukraine because they are not able to rent a house here. Yeah, I
feel their pain because I'm in the same position here. This is Councillor James
Jamieson, Chair of the Local Government Association. A large number of
sponsorship families were in rural areas and tending to be in areas of really
quite high cost housing and not necessarily huge numbers of housing. So, if you
look at the authority with the largest number of Ukrainian sponsors is
Buckinghamshire. And Buckinghamshire has a very different housing market to,
say, an urban area. So, we have ended up with the highest demand for housing for
Ukrainians in some of the most expensive parts of the country. But when it comes
to availability of housing, well, that tends to be in a more urban area because
there's more houses. So, how do we find housing without having to children who
already six months ago come from Ukraine and had that unsettled experience? We
don't want to move yet again and yet again and move to another school. So,
that's been really quite difficult. I'm Jackie Broadhead, Director of the Global
Exchange on Migration and Diversity at the University of Oxford. One of the
risks is that we focus all of the time on arrival and we don't think about
longer term integration outcomes. From the Afghan scheme, but also from the
Ukrainian scheme, there has been a mobilisation, but it's been a crisis
mobilisation. At worst, the risk is a scheme is very much focused upon whilst
it's at the top of the news agenda. And then as things fall out of the
headlines, the focus drifts onto something else. Data from the Office for
National Statistics says that around two thirds of Ukrainians in the UK have
their current living arrangements paid for by a sponsor or a charity. This is
not the Home Office, a private provider or a local authority deciding to accept
people. Instead, it's sponsors who are deciding that they have capacity and they
wish to welcome somebody. The government has also invested in a rematching
programme, so where sponsor placements do break down, the aim is that people are
able to go into new placements. The reason that they have done that is because
of the huge challenges around securing private rental sector. Oh, hi, hi, come
in. For my friend Kateryna, her original hosting arrangement didn't work out.
Everything happened very quickly. It's a strange experience to go and live with
someone you have only seen once on video. People get to know each other in close
communication. It takes a lot of courage to accept a stranger. It's like a kind
of test, a test of yourself to see how much you can give and share certain
things. So there are some misunderstandings and difficulties. This was someone
who had lived alone for a long time and there is probably also a certain comfort
that strangers can disturb, and this can cause some inconvenience. I used to
communicate a lot, it's a little difficult for me now because I'm learning the
language, but I started looking for people who were closer to my age and have
similar interests to me, so that we could communicate more and to join work that
brings people together. Kateryna's story is a reminder that our situation is
still fragile. Because with so many things outside of our control, we have to
rely on others. For me, the need is for a home of our own. In December, the
government announced two pots of money to assist local authorities with their
work with Ukrainian refugees. £150 million of funding to help with homelessness
prevention, and in England £500 million of funding to acquire homes to help
house people from Ukraine. Now that is a nice start, but that will only generate
a few thousand additional homes and we need substantially more than that. The
government expects that this amount will provide up to 4,000 extra homes by
2024, but let's put this into the context of 1.2 million people being on council
housing waiting lists. It's a relatively small amount. Are you planning to look
for your own accommodation? Because as I understood you are still living with
your host family. I'm not sure, Olya.