TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The Spark starts next Tuesday morning at 11 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News
at 8 o'clock. The families of some of the victims of the Manchester Arena
bombing have accused MI5 of playing a part in the murder of their children. A
final report from the public inquiry said the security service missed a
significant opportunity to prevent the attack. When Salman Abedi detonated his
bomb at an Ariana Grande concert in 2017, Philip Tron was standing just a few
metres away. His mother June Tron and uncle Ken Mullen hope the report's 149
recommendations will be acted upon. I just hope that something changes, that
nothing like this happens again. They all get their act together, they get
training and they know what they're doing. But more importantly there was over
100 recommendations for government bodies and the Home Secretary and they're the
ones who've got the clout to do things, the ones who've got the money. Let's
hope they take notice. In the past half hour, the Crown Prosecution Service has
said a couple have been charged with gross negligence manslaughter following the
discovery of a baby's body in an area of woodland in Brighton yesterday.
35-year-old Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, who's 48, were arrested on Monday.
The pair had been missing since January. The former Prime Minister Boris Johnson
has said he'll find it very difficult to vote for Rishi Sunak's new Brexit deal
for Northern Ireland. The government has managed to get most parties on side
with its new agreement, but is still waiting for a response from the Democratic
Unionists. A G20 meeting has ended in acrimony with disagreements over Russia's
attack on Ukraine making a joint statement impossible. Russia accused Western
nations of turning the meeting into a farce and blaming Moscow for their own
failures. But Western ministers said the current crises were caused by Moscow's
invasion of Ukraine. The World Obesity Federation says based on current trends,
just over half of the population will be classed as obese or overweight by 2035.
It says rates are rising particularly quickly among children and in lower-
middle-income countries like Asia and Africa. BBC News. This is BBC Radio 4.
Evan Davis will be along this hour with The Bottom Line. He'll be asking if
interviews and CVs are overrated, and whether technology is changing
recruitment. The Bottom Line is at half past eight. And then at nine o'clock,
it's BBC Inside Science, and today we'll be hearing from scientists who are
looking for the facts about the COVID-19 pandemic and the relationship between
government and scientific advisors. That's BBC Inside Science, just after the
news at nine. Now time for The Briefing Room with David Aronofitch. Brexit
created huge problems for Northern Ireland. Problems which were supposed to be
solved by the protocol agreed between Boris Johnson's government and the EU. But
it turned out that the protocol was creating new problems. On Monday, these were
declared solved by Rishi Sunak and the President of the European Commission,
Ursula von der Leyen, when they presented the Windsor Framework, and declared
not solved by Boris Johnson earlier today. So what's in the framework? Can it
work? And does it mean Brexit is, as is being claimed, finally done? Let's step
into The Briefing Room and together we'll find out. This task sounds
challenging, so I've called on four Briefing Room regulars to help us properly
but painlessly understand the Windsor Framework. Peter Foster is the Financial
Times Public Policy Editor. Sam McBride is Northern Ireland's editor of the
Belfast Telegraph and Sunday Independent. Anand Menon is director at UK in a
Changing Europe. And Jill Rutter is senior fellow at the Institute for
Government. Peter, if I can start off with you, what is the protocol and why has
it been such a problem? So the protocol is the deal that Boris Johnson signed,
as you said, that ensured there was not a return to a trade border in Northern
Ireland. Remember, with Brexit, the border between Northern Ireland and the
Republic of Ireland becomes an external border of the EU. And in order to avoid
that becoming a trade border, Boris Johnson signed a deal that agreed that
Northern Ireland would follow EU rules and regulations for goods. But if you're
not going to have a border north-south, you're going to have to have a border
east-west. And so the deal necessitated essentially a trade border in the Irish
Sea between Northern Ireland and Great Britain. And that trade border upset a
lot of people, a lot of unionists, particularly in Northern Ireland. It caused
frictions for businesses and has actually soured relations between the UK and
the EU pretty much since it came into force on the 1st of January 2020. Jill,
briefly, why did the EU insist upon it, given that it was likely to cause
problems? Because one of the EU's big red lines was to protect what they call
the integrity of the single market. Any goods circulating in Northern Ireland,
they assumed could just, because there would be no land border in the island of
Ireland, reach Ireland inside the EU single market and go from there without any
of those checks into the rest of the EU. So they were saying in order to protect
the integrity of our single market, we need to be sure that goods in Northern
Ireland meet our standards. So Sam, why has it been, from your vantage point in
Northern Ireland, why has it been so problematic politically in Northern
Ireland? There are two ways, Jan. First of all, in practical terms, there have
been a host of practical problems. So this was about trade barriers between
Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Northern Ireland is about 2.8% of the UK
population. It's a very small market for most British companies. And lots of
them simply looked at this and said, look, we simply could not be bothered with
this. We're not selling to Northern Ireland anymore. There were then other
products quite specifically, which were simply banned from Northern Ireland. So
even if a British company wanted to sell a bare root apple tree with a few
molecules of British soil on its routes to Northern Ireland, that was banned
outright. No matter how many forms they filled in, it simply could not come
here. These were rules which in many cases were designed for whole containers of
a product, maybe whole ships of a product coming into the EU from China, from
Brazil. They were never designed for a single country's internal market where
small quantities move back and forth. So they were never really going to work
here, frankly. But that was just the practical stuff. The real nub of this is
the politics. And for unionists, in many cases, this made them feel less
British. They felt like they were being pushed away from Britain. And at the
same time, because the Irish Republic is obviously in the EU, they were coming
closer to the Irish Republic, and they didn't want that. Right. And it now falls
to you to begin the dissection of the Windsor Framework. Now, in the first
instance, what are the major differences between the Windsor Framework and the
protocol? Well, let me start with the similarity, which is that under both,
Northern Ireland continues to be under some EU rules, particularly when it
pertains to trade for goods. And EU rules means that the ultimate arbiter of the
legality of what happens in those areas is the European Court, the European
Court of Justice. So the broad principles remain the same. But the major
differences, I think, are the introduction of this Green Lane, about which we've
heard so much. So some of the practical problems that Sam was talking about have
been addressed within the framework of the protocol. And also, crucially, this
so-called Stormont break, which the government has sold as a veto over EU laws
that people in Northern Ireland don't like, which the EU has said is a mechanism
that will rarely, if ever, be used. But it is a way of giving Northern Ireland
far more of a say, at least in principle, over the rules that govern it than was
the case under the original protocol. Now, Peter, and Anne's referred to Green
Lanes, which suggests that there are other coloured lanes, which we won't be
surprised to discover are red. What are they? So pretty simply, the red lane is
for goods that are going from Great Britain into the European Union, into the
Republic of Ireland, which is a member of the European Union. And when it's in
the red lane, it faces the full panoply of checks, as it would if it was going
from Dover to Calais or from Dover to Rotterdam. The green lane is a special
access route, which, as Sam said, if you apply the full panoply of EU export
controls, you end up with a massive internal border in the UK. So the green lane
says, if you're pre-registered with a trusted trader scheme and you clearly
label your goods as for consumption in Northern Ireland only, then you can get
massively reduced checks. Now, the clever thing about that is it's work for
business still, but for consumers, they'll get access to the full range of
products. And as Sam said, things like potatoes, seed potatoes and plants for
the garden centres of Ulster will travel freely. And the big concession I think
the EU has done there is they basically recognised that the EU can accept that
UK food standards and food rules are equivalent to the EU ones. And so goods,
you know, the famous banger made to British standards can now go freely from
Birmingham to Belfast in the green lane, as long as it's clearly labelled.
Peter, you've pre-empted my quickfire question, first quickfire question to Sam,
which was on its website, the government's listed some of the things that were
causing problems under the old protocol, and then talked about how things were
changing. I'm just going to pass a few across to you very quickly. So it's true
or false really, sausages and chilled meats were banned under the old protocol,
but that problem is now fixed, they say. True or false? Yes, that's true. Okay.
Pets faced costly certificates and checks, but now that's fixed. True or false?
True. That's true too. And access to medicines were impacted by EU laws, but
that's now fixed. Is that true? Mostly true. The slight caveat being that we
were told that was true a long time ago and it actually turned out not to be
true. Stormont's Department of Health is still saying it's looking at this, but
it seems to at least be mostly true right now. Right. Now, Sam, let's also look
at this question of the green lanes, which are supposed to be totally trouble
free. And on Monday, the Prime Minister specifically said, given that we now
have the green lane, burdensome customs bureaucracy will be scrapped. I just
won't be any. Now, is that right? Well, he actually went further than that the
following day on Radio 4, where he said that there would basically be no customs
whatsoever in the green lane. I wrote that that was highly misleading. He then
came to Belfast on Tuesday, having read what I'd written and said that I was
completely wrong. But I think that he is wrong here. There is a clear
requirement for the EU customs code to apply in Northern Ireland. There are
still 21 data fields that have to be filled out even once you get into the green
lane, which requires registration with a trusted trader scheme. So you can
simply put goods in the back of a white van if you happen to own one in your
company, drive to the ferry, bring it to a customer in Northern Ireland in the
same way that you would elsewhere in GB. However, that does not mean that this
has not been massively simplified. What are now 21 data fields had been 80 data
fields. So it's much more practical. It's much more pragmatic. But in
ideological terms, the simple answer is it's still there. On Tuesday, the Prime
Minister then said the Windsor framework would make Northern Ireland the world's
most exciting economic zone. Jill, on what basis did he say that? So he's saying
that because Northern Ireland for its goods has access to the EU single market,
free access to that. But it's also an integral part of the UK internal market.
And what he's saying is only Northern Ireland can face both ways in that sense.
This is a bit similar in if your listeners remember to one of the things that
Theresa May was looking at for goods, where she wanted to have a common rulebook
on goods with the EU. And that would have applied to the whole UK. But he's now
saying, you know, come and invest in Northern Ireland because they have this
uniquely beneficial ability to trade in both markets. Peter Foster, why don't
you point out the obvious irony here? Which is if the single market is so
brilliant for Northern Ireland, why isn't it so brilliant for everybody else?
You know, I mean, Brexit took us out of the single market, piled bureaucracy on
all of our traders, both in goods and services. And to see a Prime Minister who
describes himself as pro-union, pro-Brexit, implicitly acknowledging that the
single market is better for everybody. Well, let's say that raised a wry smile
among a few people. Sam, has the Irish sea border, which was such a problem for
unions, has that now gone? And I should just say here that the former
negotiator, Lord Frost, has argued that the government is guilty of some over
claiming when it said there is now no border in the Irish sea. So who's right,
Rishi Sunak or Lord Frost? I think on this one, Lord Frost is correct. That's
without passing any judgment on anything that he has done in the past in this
regard, because he was obviously heavily implicated in putting in place the
protocol, which was much worse than this arrangement in both practical and
political terms. But I think that anybody looking at this with any objectivity
would say that, yes, there is still an Irish sea border. There is an Irish sea
customs border, a regulatory border. There are laws which will apply in Northern
Ireland, which do not apply in other parts of the UK. So it has been softened.
It has been camouflaged. Some of that is through enormous public spending to try
to help firms get around this customs border in particular. I think that Matthew
Hull House had it right earlier this week when he said that legally the claim by
the Prime Minister that the border has gone is nonsense in strict legal terms.
But from the perspective of a Belfast supermarket, it might seem true enough.
And that's the interesting bit here. When people actually boil all of this down,
do they actually care about the constitutional principles or do they care that
stuff's actually flowing freely into Northern Ireland and they don't notice it
any longer? A very interesting question, which we will look up. I should just
say that Matthew Hull House works for The Economist. And Anand, I'm afraid you
have the unenviable task of telling us what the Stormont break is. Well, the
Stormont break is this mechanism that is meant to mean that people in Northern
Ireland get to exercise a degree of consent over those EU rules. Remember, one
of the democratic problems with something like the protocol or with being in the
single market and not a member state is you live under rules over which you have
no say. Now, the EU isn't going to give a non-member state a vote. But this is
quite a clever solution, which means that if 30 MLAs in Stormont register
disapproval of an EU measure, London can then, if London so decides, flag this
up to the European Union and say, we're not going to apply this. Now, that's not
the end of the story. The bit of the story that the British government hasn't
been so keen on is the EU might then decide to retaliate in some way if we do
this. So it's not a free pass, but it does give that sense of consultation in
Stormont that was missing in the original protocol. Now, MLAs, we should just
explain are members of the Northern Ireland Assembly. Jill, why 30? I mean, how
many MLAs are there? I believe there are 90. So 30 is just a third. So this is
using a procedure that already exists in Northern Ireland called the Petitions
of Concern. So you need 30 MLAs from two parties. So it's designed to sort of
allow, if you like, either community. In Northern Ireland, in the Assembly,
people have to designate what community they are from. So it's designed to sort
of give around enough of those, but they can't on current numbers do it just
from one party because neither Sinn Féin nor the DUP have quite enough MLAs to
reach the 30 threshold. And that was done so that a majority couldn't railroad a
large minority into something they didn't want under the terms of the Good
Friday Agreement. So this is part of these things about sort of cross-community
consent to try and make sure that actually decisions respect the principles of
the Good Friday Agreement, that you have to take the majority of people in
Northern Ireland with you and you can protect the rights of minorities, which
after all was one of the reasons we're in this place in the first place. Just so
I understand this correctly, Sam McBride, Stormont would be able to propose
blocking a new EU law, or rather 30 members of the Assembly would be able to,
but the UK government would have the final say. Well yes, in most areas of this,
but I think that actually while on paper All Par is really in London, so it's
not really a Belfast veto at all, it's not even really a Belfast break at all,
at the final stage of this process, if it is disputed, that becomes external to
the UK. So there's this arbitration panel, probably foreign lawyers, people who
sit down and look at this objectively, and they say, is this reasonable after
all of the various stages that have been gone through, one of which is to say
that this must be something which is significant, which is going to cause
significant divergence between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. How is that
defined? We don't know. Lots of questions around this, but I think that while
this is something which I think is probably never going to be used successfully,
it's not actually going to really work. It is not entirely worthless for two
reasons. First of all, it is some leverage for Stormont with the EU if they're
really unhappy about a law, if they've got a valid reason to object, they can
say, look, if you don't do this, we might go down this very cumbersome route and
kick up a lot of dust. That's one thing. The second more significant thing is
democratically. This gives some democratic legitimacy to what is happening here.
Previously, EU laws were passed with no representatives of Northern Ireland
having any say whatsoever. This doesn't give them anything like a veto, but it
gives them some sort of say, and that's something. That's very interesting.
Jill, were you surprised that the EU conceded this break? Well, it already
conceded that there would be quite regular votes in Northern Ireland on the
application of the whole protocol. And the UK already was able to say that a new
EU law wouldn't apply in Northern Ireland because that could only be done in the
joint committee by the UK and the EU agreeing. So the additional bit that we
have here is an ability for members of Stormont to raise concerns about a change
to an existing EU law that's already applying in Northern Ireland. So was I
surprised? I think the interesting thing here is that Sam has said it basically,
I think they're betting that it won't actually materialise in practice. The
barriers to using it are quite high, but it will force quite a lot of
consideration of the Northern Ireland dimension before changes take place. I
think that's the really important part of this. Now, let's go on to the
political impact of all this and also, indeed, the chances of there being
problems for the Windsor framework going forward. Now, Boris Johnson has said
today that he'll find it hard to vote for this deal. And here's a quote from
him. This is the EU graciously unbending to do what we want in our country, not
by our laws, but by theirs. Now, Sam, firstly, is he right? And would the
Northern Ireland protocol he negotiated have given the UK more control? Well, I
think that if you take a strict, literal reading of what he says, yes, he is
right in that there is real power that still resides with the EU. But that was a
political choice which he made. I think that the level of brass neck that Boris
Johnson has in this area is of really biblical proportions. I mean, there is
this extraordinary situation where he was the person who negotiated this with
his eyes open, with officials telling him what it meant. We know that from the
government documents at the time. It's very clear there was an Irish sea border.
He knew that. He did it. He was able to defend that to his party. He got them
over the line. He then lied about what that would mean. Then it turned out that
that actually did mean what everybody had said it would mean at the start. And
now that this awful deal has been improved significantly, and I think that
anybody in Northern Ireland can see it's been improved significantly, whatever
their political outlook on this, he is now trying to urge the DUP, it seems,
from what some of the reporting was saying earlier this week, to be very
cautious about it. I mean, I think what Boris Johnson looks like out of this is
somebody who really doesn't care about the issue at hand and somebody who has
been using Northern Ireland consistently and very dangerously for his own ends
throughout this process. Now before we get even more deeply into the politics
and what the Johnson speech might mean, for example, for the DUP's stance, Gill,
just on a technical level, does Rishi Sunak need a parliamentary vote to
implement this? No, not to implement most of the deal. The agreement that was
passed by Parliament when they signed up the Trade and Cooperation Agreement and
the Withdrawal Agreement gave the UK and the EU really quite stunning powers in
the Joint Committee to agree changes. So most of it can be done through that.
But the government has said it will legislate in some areas, and there may be
some areas where it needs to just tidy things up a bit. And the EU also needs to
legislate a bit. So one area it said is it needs to legislate to codify the
operation of the Stormont break and it's going to be consulting the parties on
how that operates. But is this a sort of up and down to ratify it? No. So
legally, he doesn't need a vote on the deal. Does he need it politically? Well,
he seems to have judged that he does, because he said he is going to give MPs an
opportunity to express their views. Sam, the political situation in Northern
Ireland right now, isn't it, is that the DUP is refusing to take part in power
sharing until this question is resolved. What does the DUP make of this deal? Do
you think it's going to accept it? I think that there were seven tests that the
DUP set out for this deal that they said it had to pass. It wasn't that it had
to pass a majority of them. It had to pass all of them. They were things like
putting back the Act of Union, Article 6 of the Act of Union about free trade
within the British Isles, as they then were, and between GB and NI as it now is.
That sort of thing. Quite detailed, quite technical. Some of them written to be
ambiguous. But actually, when I went through them yesterday and I tried to
analyse how many of these are met by the legal text, I could only come up with
two of them that were clearly met by that. And some of them really beyond any
argument are not met by that. So I think it's very hard for the DUP to back
this. Already some of their people have come out and said they can't back it. I
think they will sit on the fence for now. If there's an urgent vote on this in
Parliament, that suits them, I think, because they can credibly say we haven't
had enough time, we're not going to be rushed in six weeks' time. They can't do
that. It's just more awkward. And I think at some point they will go back into
stormant while grumbling loudly about this while doing what, if you like, Boris
Johnson does, trying to have their cake, trying to eat it, trying to eke out
something else. But I think they do recognise this makes things much better for
them. And is this your impression as well? And also, if they are going to sit on
the fence for six weeks, what impact will that have on Conservatives back in
Westminster? Well, what's been striking this week, at least, and for the moment,
is the degree to which the usual suspects haven't hyped up and expressed their
opposition to the deal. So in that sense, I think it might not matter much at
all for the Conservatives. There are some diehards who will go whichever way the
DUP go. But I think actually the longer the DUP take, the more chance Suna can
have to sort of square this with some of his backbench troops. The only thing I
would add is if this happens after the budget and if there's significant
backbend opposition to the budget because of a lack of tax cuts or whatever,
these tend to be the usual suspects. If there's a head of steam in a rebellion
building up over something else, that might get marshalled behind this. But it's
very, very hard to know for sure. Right. Now, Jill, if the DUP does actually end
up rejecting the deal and it goes through anyway, is that the end of devolution
and the Legislative Assembly at Stormont? Not necessarily, because as Sam said,
that they could go back into government in Northern Ireland by saying that
they've done their best to oppose a bad deal, but they accept reality. And, you
know, the people of Northern Ireland want their devolved government back and
need their devolved government back because there's a huge big backlog of
decisions that politicians there need to make. So we can't really judge that,
nor can we judge the timing of that. Their local elections, I think, coming up
in Northern Ireland in early May, maybe the DUP take a hard line until then and
then find a way of going back into government. They may play it very long and
decide they don't want to go back into government until there are new Assembly
elections. Those have been delayed until next year now, and they have a chance
of becoming the largest party again and therefore don't have to serve under a
Sinn Fein first minister. Well, Sam, that takes me to exactly where I want to
go, because one thing you notice in these discussions of the framework is that
other parties in Northern Ireland just about never get mentioned. And yet Sinn
Fein not only won the last Assembly elections and would therefore appoint the
first minister, they're also the main opposition party in Ireland. Yet we don't
seem to hear much from them on this. Is this our fault or is this something to
do with them being careful? If you look at the history of Northern Ireland,
there have been other points where Sinn Fein has been much more prominent
earlier in the peace process. I think that the simple reality here is that it
was the DUP who pulled down Stormont. They had the power to put it back. A few
years ago, it was Sinn Fein who pulled it down. They had the power to put it
back. And so that is the reality of what the Good Friday Agreement allows. It
gives really significant clout to a relatively small party within Northern
Ireland. It's not a majoritarian system. So what the majority think, which is
pro-protocol, which is pro-the EU, really doesn't matter that much in terms of
this question of getting Stormont back. So it's an odd thing, but it is the
reality. I think that most of those other Irish nationalist parties, north or
south of the border, there has been no real controversy as far as they're
concerned around this. A little bit of unease around this Stormont break, but I
think as they've realised that it's not much of a break at all, certainly not a
unionist veto, they are fairly relaxed about that. It eases some of the
practical problems. They can live with that. That's good for their constituents.
So that will not be a problem here, I don't think. Peter, let's imagine for a
moment that the DUP don't agree to support it. And some Tories say they will
rebel. And there may be, as we've heard, some votes. What will the Labour Party
do? And if the government has to rely upon Labour for its majority, is that a
problem for them? It would be a very bad look for the Prime Minister, who has
his position by commanding a majority in the House. I don't think that's at all
likely. From a Labour Party perspective, it's actually allowed them, by allowing
them to back this deal to be statesmanlike and bipartisan in a way, in fact,
that they weren't when Theresa May was trying to get her deal across the line. I
think it's also allowed them to highlight the fact that in lots of areas, and
there are other areas of policy, this retained EU law bill, bits of the Bill of
Rights legislation, where the Tory party, as Starman advertised of saying, is
being, you know, the tail has been wagged, or the dog is being wagged, the
tail's being wagged by the dog. And actually, one of the effects of this deal is
actually it's rather sort of, you know, the tide's gone out. And in some ways,
Boris Johnson doesn't have his trunks on, I think. You know, that very hardline
coterie of sovereignty above all costs, wing of the Tory party that's driven so
much of Brexit policy is kind of being found out, being facedown. And I think,
you know, that's a big step forward. Alan, do you agree with that? Yeah, very
much. I mean, having struggled with digesting Peter's various metaphors, yes, I
think I do. Jill, let's look at the, if you'd like, the kind of bigger, even
bigger long term question. Do you think that the Windsor Framework's
successfully being implemented, going through and being implemented, would open
the way to a reassessment of other aspects of the UK's relationship with the EU?
In other words, I suppose I'm trying to say, has the atmosphere now very much
changed? I think the atmosphere was already changing from the sort of
belligerent hostility era that we saw after the Trade and Cooperation Agreement
was signed, when relations were frankly put into deep freeze, and the EU broke
off cooperation in a lot of other areas. So there wasn't progress on those. So I
think it was very interesting, Ursula von der Leyen, with Rishi Sunak on Monday,
was visibly very warm towards him. Everybody's talking about the dear Rishi.
That's in German, that's a slightly more normal thing to say, perhaps than it is
in English. But lieber Rishi, so yeah, we forgive her that. But she did sort of
mention that we could go back and start looking at ratification of this UK
membership, this big Horizon Science Programme, which has been a big UK bugbear
that the EU had linked lack of progress on that to the UK's position on the
failure to resolve that. And I think, but I may be wrong, that Labour is hoping
that over a period of closer relationship with EU will open up all kinds of
other possibilities. Has this brought that possibility a step closer?
Essentially, yes, though only to a limited extent. I mean, actually, now that
the protocol looks like it's been resolved, there's not that much of a
difference between conservative and Labour positions on Europe. You know, Labour
will do an SPS deal, maybe a veterinary agreement, tinkering around the edges
with what there already is here. In a sense, Sunak solving the protocol robs
Stalmer of the opportunity to get the big win of Horizon if he were the person
to have solved the protocol. So to a limited extent, yes, Labour will take a
slightly closer in power, I think, than the Tories would, but not to any massive
extent, and crucially, not in the areas where the real economic impacts come
from, which is the single market. So slightly. I hate to do this to you, but I'm
looking for a one word answer nearly from each of you. Is this going to be our
last briefing room on Brexit, Jill? I hope so. Peter? No. Anand? No. Sam?
Certainly not. Oh, dear. Sam McBride, Jill Rutter, Anand Menon, and Peter
Foster, thank you all so much. And what do I make of this? I'm going to have to
go and get a drink. I'm going to have to go and get a drink. I'm going to have
to go and get a drink. I'm going to have to go and get a drink. I'm going to
have to go and get a drink. I'm going to have to go and get a drink. I'm going
to have to go and get a drink. And what do I make of all this? Well, it's pretty
simple really, isn't it? Brexit still isn't done. This is the last programme in
the current series, but we'll be back next month. The Briefing Room was
presented by David Aronovich, the producer was Ben Carter, and the editor was
Richard Varden. And you can find previous episodes of The Briefing Room on BBC
Sounds. Next Wednesday, our series which goes off the beaten track to uncover
interesting stories returns. The Patch, on BBC Radio 4. One producer. What was
amazing to me as an outsider was how normal all this was. One random generated
postcode. So I've got to press that? Press that button and a story unfolding
there you wouldn't otherwise know about. What do you sell then? Everything and
anything. Unheard stories from across the UK. What do you do after being a
prison officer? The Patch on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds starts next Wednesday
morning at 9. Now on BBC Radio 4, time for the bottom line which this week is
asking, what's the best way to hire? Here's Evan Davis. Hello, welcome to the
programme. We are always inclined to judge others, aren't we? But it is all too
easy to misjudge them as well. And in business, this matters a lot because
companies have to judge people every day in order to make choices about who they
employ or promote. And I think it's underappreciated. For example, people talk
endlessly about how to improve productivity, about how we have to get the most
out of each employee for each hour worked. But recruitment rarely gets a mention
in such conversations. And yet putting people in jobs that they can naturally do
well is surely among the most important things a company can do to improve
productivity. So how should they go about selecting the right folks for the job?
It's an area that is changing. Technology plays a part. The requirement for
diversity is also extremely important. So let us discuss it with three guests.
The first up is Sir John Timpson, chairman of the Timpson Group, which is
perhaps best known for high street shops that do everything from re-soling your
shoes to replacing the screen on your mobile phone. When it comes to
recruitment, you're a very special company because you are particularly famous
for recruiting ex-offenders. Yeah, we are. Well, that happened completely by
chance, simply because my son James, who is our current chief executive, went to
a prison, Thorncross, near Warrington, because there was a business occasion
there and a tour around the prison. And Matt, the inmate who showed James
around, impressed James so much. He said, here's my card. When you get out, get
in touch. I'll give you a job. And that's how we started 20 years ago, and for
good reasons. One was the fact there still are 85,000 people in prison and no
one was actively trying to recruit there. So we got the pick of the bunch. And
secondly, people without a job leaving prison, more than 60% were likely to re-
offend. With a job, that percentage goes down to under 20%. So now about 13% of
our workforce, that's 500 people, have joined us from prison, and it's all been
a great success. Right. Now, how do you choose the good ones from the ones who
are not going to work? OK, we're after a business which is full of people with a
9 or 10 out of 10 personality. You can teach somebody who's got great
personality how to cut keys, but you can't put great personality into a grumpy
cobbler. And that told us that what we've got to do is to recruit on
personality. But what is personality and how do you spot it? Well, I think,
first of all, you've got to have it to spot it. And once you've got the right
people in your business and you've got the right culture, they will know it. And
I'll go to a shop and I'll find someone, not quite us, and I'll ring the area
manager and say, well, I'm in wherever it is. Oh, God, they'll say, I know
you're talking about Hamish or whatever it might be. Yeah. I said, what do you
think? I reckon he's only about a sixth. You're dead right. Well, what are you
going to do about it? We've got that language. It's not written down anywhere,
but you know it. And we ask them to work. We don't ask them. We pay them to work
for a day in a shop with someone who gets it. And that's the final check. OK,
that's John Timpson. Also joining us, Claire Hamilton, who's head of UK talent
acquisition at the global business and services group Capgemini. Absolutely
massive company. Claire, just tell us a quick biography of what it does. So
we're 14,000 people in the UK, 350,000 worldwide. We're made up of a number of
different brands and they offer different consulting services in different
sectors around the world. And massive software projects at companies all over
the place will be hiring Capgemini to help them get things installed. How do you
recruit at Capgemini? You're head of UK talent acquisition. How do you acquire
talent? The important thing for us really is to do it in as many different ways
as possible. So recognising that to attract a graduate to come and work for us
is a very different effort to say, attracting somebody who's got years of
experience in industry. And equally, if we're looking at attracting executives
to the business, it's another experience as well. But Claire, let's not deal
with how you recruit a new chief executive or people at the more routine end,
but people in the middle with skills. Is it job interviews? Is it CVs? It will
depend on the type of role. So if we're looking at something very technical,
we'll include a technical test. But yes, it's interviews. We may offer people to
come in and spend a couple of hours with their team. So culturally, do you feel
like you belong and that you fit and that you believe in the values? And I think
there's a real emotional tie to moving jobs now. It's not as simple as saying,
right, you'll do, tick the box, in you come. It's absolutely about making sure
that people want to work for you and that they've got a choice today. How were
you recruited? Just talk us through, you've been there just under a year. What
was the process you went through? So I applied for a job on LinkedIn. That's
already, we're into kind of how this is all changed. So I had a phone call
within 24 hours from the recruiter that was looking after the job. Would really
like to talk you through the position, find out more about you. I then had an
interview with my now boss. And then I met two of the senior leaders in the
business. But it was a really good experience. And there was a lot around, you
know, how do you feel about the organisation? What are your drivers? And I think
that just goes to show it wasn't necessarily about can I save them money? Can I
do this? It was do I care? It's very interesting you've talked about cultural
fit. And we'll talk more about that because obviously that can sometimes be used
as a way of excluding people who may come from different backgrounds, different
cultures and such like. But let me introduce my third guest, Michael Barrington-
Hibbert, who is the founder of and chief executive of Barrington-Hibbert
Associates. Just tell us a little about the business and what you do. Thank you,
Evan. And before I actually talk a little bit about the business, it's come full
circle. So John, I actually encountered in sunny Bracknell, Berkshire, one of
his incredible stores. This is between university and had an opportunity to
speak to a gentleman called John who actually worked there. And we struck up a
conversation. And he said, Look, Michael, I think you're a solid nine out of 10.
So I beat Hamish by three, by the way. So I had a job offer in Bracknell. But
unfortunately, I had to go back to university. But it has come full circle. It's
a pleasure to meet you, Sir John. So just in terms of the genus of my
organization, we are an executive search firm, and we really do specialize in
placing underrepresented groups. That is not just ethnic minorities. We're
looking about social inclusion. I come from a working class background, born in
a council states. And my journey was one of exclusion. It was one where I didn't
quite fit the mould, whether it be from an academic standpoint, my social
economic background. So for us, we hunt for those who don't have the voice in
the boardroom. And we focus predominantly with UK FTSE 100 companies. I want to
get into this topic through the program. But just as a starter, we've heard
about Sir John rating everybody and just knowing who fits and we've heard about
Claire having coffee with the team and cultural fit. Are those methods, if you
like, of filtering who works and who doesn't work for our organization, is that
up against what you're trying to do, Michael, which is bringing people from
other backgrounds and cultures? Look, I think it's nuanced. It's complex. CEOs
are rewarded for risks. If you're going to hire a CFO, are you going to take a
chance on Hamish or Matt? Or are you going to take a chance on somebody who's
actually done the job at another competitor before? As I was once told, no one
gets fired for hiring someone from Oxford or Cambridge who has done a similar
role. So we're trying to educate leaders around the returns that a diverse
workforce has. And this is the fundamental challenge. When we work with
organizations, I want to work with people like Sir John. I need to work in the
boardroom because once that culture is defined, it filters through the
organization. But it also goes down to middle management because there's an
element where middle management are under-resourced. They don't have the
training. So I'm going to enjoy having a conversation with you, but are you
empowered by the C-suite to really drive the cultural evolution of Capgemini?
Thank you. I think yes. They don't just pay lip service to this. And we've got
six employee networks, women at Capgemini, we've got the Race and Equality
Network, we've got the Armed Forces Network. All of these things are supported
by our C-suite. As a headhunter, I hear this all the time in terms of employee
resource groups, commitment around numbers. But is that really changing the
dial? If we talk about for-moment gender, we've seen a three-point increase in
the last year in females in our organization in the UK. Now three points doesn't
sound like a lot, but in the tech space, you know. Not always, most dials.
Exactly. Yes, it's moving the needle, but I think the part of it is about doing
more than you commit to do. And that's why I messaged Michael last night and
said, I'd love to talk to you after the show because there's things that I think
we need to do more of to get to where we need to be. So these are ways in which
you might not really be recruiting open-mindedly, is your point. You're not
recruiting open-mindedly. How do you select that? What do you do to make sure
you get a pool that is open-minded, drawn from a large panel, if you like, a
cross-section? So we partner with diverse charities. We work with the Armed
Forces. We work with the Prisoners Association. So we really do cast our net. So
we sponsor, we give scholarships out to individuals. So we've been in this space
for over 20 years. So our network is very diverse. We don't actually send job
descriptions out. We have conversations. So an element of what Sir John said,
you have a personality, you have a conversation. Let me give you a chance. I
think one of the things that we have a real problem with in every organisation,
not unique to where I am, or I'm sure where any of you are, is helping people
understand how to hire for potential. Someone wants to look at, right, I've got
this perfect 10 and I'm not going to take someone who's 60% and offer them
development. So one of the important things I think is education of our middle
management, particularly the decision makers, who will be looking, well, John
just left this job. He had been in the business for 20 years and he could do all
of these things. But actually to go to market and replace him, you're never
going to get like for like. So how do we hire for potential? Do you think CVs,
references and interviews are a bit out of date? I suppose interviews and.
Interviews are not out of date. You've got to meet the person. But not to ask
the sort of questions that were traditionally asked. My idea of an interview is
just having a chat. I'm not interested in a CV, I don't want to know what
qualifications they've got. No trick questions where you kind of go out the room
and see how they behave when you or give them a funny thing. No, no, no, or
giving them any task to do. Just have a chat. Chat about their home life. What
team do they support, who are their best friends? That's the way you get to know
what their personality is like. And when I started, it was quite a big shift to
get a business that was recruiting purely on skills. And they went the skill
test was, you know, go and repair a pair of shoes and then we'll decide whether
they hire you. I wasn't interested in that. So that's when I invented my Mr. Men
interview form, which is lots of little caricatures with an empty box under each
of them. There's one set which is Mrs. Happy, Mr. Keen, Mr. Helpful, Mrs. Nice.
So you ask them which they are? No, no, no, no, they don't get the form. It
wouldn't work that way. And then there's the other lot with Mr. Grumpy, Mr.
Scruffy, Mr. Unhelpful and so on. And you have a chat and then you tick the
boxes that most suit that character under the Mr. Men. And those people who got
ticked the right boxes, the happy and the keen and the helpful, they're the ones
who are asked to spend a day in a branch. And that's where we go. How is that
consistent across the United Kingdom in terms of your stalls? One important
thing is that we will not employ anyone into our field team outside of the
business. Everyone who runs the whole of our organisation out in the field
started as an apprentice. So they've done the training through that. They know
what we want. I mean, it's something that just talking about CVs and interviews,
the other two of you, to what extent are those genuinely useful indicators at
telling good candidates from less good candidates? I think it's an indicator.
There's a lot of tall tales that people do put into CVs, but it's an indicator.
At least it tells you where they've worked, what type of skill set they may
have. I think the interview to Sir John's point is where you really get down to
the nitty gritty. For me, it's much more conversational. It's not about firing
hundreds of competency based questions at someone and kind of making them sweat
throughout an interview. You want to create an environment where they can really
tell you about some of the things that they're good at, some of the things
they're passionate about. And that may be about their football teams as much as
it is about the skills that they've developed and honed through their career. I
always liked the lunch test, which was the thing. You ask your question, would I
like to have lunch with this person? Could I survive? Or maybe dinner? Or maybe
a transit landing? That's a measure of how much you relate to that person's
personality. I disagree slightly with that, because what that does is bring
one's own bias into the equation. This is the issue, isn't it? This is the
fundamental issue. So I'm 43, and I had my children back for half term last week
with one of their 16 year old friends. And I struggled to spend five minutes
with her. She's lovely. She's adorable. But we're just coming from very
different places. And I think who's done it really well. And I think that's one
of the questions is Body Shop. Body Shop have removed for entry level roles,
interviews and CVS. What they've done is called open hiring. So effectively, if
you answer these three questions, are you qualified to work in the United
Kingdom? Are you happy to work eight hours a day? And are you a team player?
They invite people in for a day paid. And if it goes well, then they'll be
offered a permanent contract. And as a consequence, their diversity metrics from
an ethnicity, gender, but also retention is also increased exponentially. Are
you a fan of blind CVS, Michael? You should explain those ones where basically
you don't give away anything about your background. No photo, no name, no age.
You essentially only put the stuff they need to know. And so they can't bring
unconscious biases is the theory. Do you a fan of those? No from my experience.
So I mentioned earlier, I come from a single parent, one bed council flat in
Wembley. And I ended up at Oxford University. And what tends to happen is people
will look at my beginning and see where I've got to and been able to delineate
some of the barriers that I had to overcome. So actually better candidate than
the one from Eton because had to get potentially. So again, from that
standpoint, I would prefer to have the information. However, I have my own
biases. So again, there's no foolproof formula, what the best route is and what
the wrong route is. How do you counter the charge, John, that there will be all
sorts of unconscious biases that your team are displaying and you don't know
because they're picking people who they like and who have tens or nines on the
personality scale that they've chosen. And you'll be missing good people as a
result of that. Always. I mean, you try really hard, you talk about it, but
there will always be a level of bias. I mean, we create a certain amount of bias
in our business by the fact that we tend to employ a lot of friends and
relations of people who already work for us. We also discriminate in favor of
people from the armed forces because that's people leaving the forces are very
vulnerable part of society. So yeah, you can't help some sort of bias. What I'm
hearing so far is there is no obvious single bullet way of recruiting the right
people. Is that fair? We try and encourage organizations to diversify their
suppliers. We advise the FTSE 100 companies that we work with actually to work
with minority owned businesses, whether it be gender, ethnic minority, to be
able to have a wider stretch when it comes to candidates. Equally, we have to
look at it from a pipelining standpoint. So I co-founded 10,000 Black interns in
the summer of 2020 to create paid internships for Black students across the
United Kingdom. And year to date, I think we're at 5,000 paid internships. Last
year, we launched 10,000 able interns. So this looks aimed at neurodiversity,
people with physical ailments, mental ailments in terms of being able to get
access into the workforce. But there's no silver bullet approach, unfortunately.
It's cultural evolution. Yeah. Right. Now, how is it changing? Technology has
offered a whole new set of things companies can do. Claire, do you snoop in the
social media backgrounds of your candidates to see if there's anything dodgy
there? Absolutely not. You don't? Why not? Must be tempting. Well, I think we
hire thousands of people every year, and it would be quite an investment to go
and do that. But I think we've all got the right to a private life. I certainly
don't feel that going into someone's personal Facebook account would be a good
way to assess them against their job. I would disagree on that for sure. Most
reputationally, when we are working not just with interns, but also senior
execs, we do a bio, but we also do a sense check in terms of their social media
handles. You've seen the impact it has on shares and stock prices where you see
homophobic tweets put out by senior executives. So I really do believe that the
C-suite, so people like Sir John, the CFO, the executives, middle management and
even interns going in, it's really important. I think they have to manage that,
but organisations I think will be doing more in terms of people's backgrounds
and things of that nature. Let's just think a bit more about technology and the
way it can affect this. And I want to play a clip from Wouter de Ville. He is
the founder and chief executive of Test Gorilla. It is a service companies can
use that offers them a library of online aptitude tests that they can use or
tailor in order to screen applicants. Here's how he describes the business.
Let's imagine you're recruiting a customer service person. So you want to test
for different things. So you can add a test about problem solving, for example,
cognitive ability, but also for actual customer service skills, like
communication might be very relevant in this case. And then you can customise it
further with your own custom questions. So for example, hey, why do you want to
work for our company? Or here you have an email from a customer. How would you
respond? And you send out this assessment to all your candidates, either by
email or even better in the vacancy where you in the past would say, please send
us your CV. You can now put a link directly to the assessment. Now and then as a
customer, once you have your candidates, you can log into your account and there
you will see all your candidates ranked from the highest scoring one to the
lowest scoring one. And what happens in practice is that you spend your time on
the best candidates. So for those, you're going to double click, you're going to
see, hey, who are those people? And then you decide on who you invite for an
interview. So it's a very different process, which is much more fair because
everyone gets a fair chance all of a sudden, not only if you have the perfect
shiny brand names on your CV, for example, and it's much more efficient. We
think there is a huge shift from the old way of hiring based on CVs and manual
screening towards a new skills-based hiring. And that's accelerated by some mega
trends in the market, like increasing social awareness of bias, right? Like Me
Too, Black Lives Matter, you name them, but also the increasing global talent
pool. So if you're working remotely, you get talent from all over the world
applying. How on earth are you going to use a CV to compare them? You can't
because you don't know all these brands. I think my kids, they will see CV-based
screening as things like smoking in public, right? Or driving without seatbelts.
It's just unfair and not something for the 21st century. So that's Wouter
Derwiel, who's behind Test Gorilla. What about you, Michael? Are you attracted
to aptitude tests? We are. I actually made a decision as a business to actually
invest in a couple of companies, one being Equitas, which is an intelligent
software to give middle managers the opportunity to be able to hire and recruit
more diverse teams by utilising preloaded aptitude testing. So I do believe that
it has a place. But again, it's proof of concept. It's not established just yet.
John, you must have, because we really talked about your team, you know, running
the shops. What about your management? So first, we should say the chief
executive of Timpsons is your son. He went through a strange interview process.
But even the others on the... We will use typically a recruitment consultant to
provide us with a shortlist to make sure we've got the skills we need. But then
again, we are interviewing for attitude. It's so important for us that people
who are working outside of the shops realise that their job isn't to tell people
what to do out there. It's to help them do the job. Their support, and it's very
different from most other head offices. How many of you measure outcomes in
recruitment? And I'm asking this because I think there are people on this planet
who are better at getting through job applications than doing the job. How many
times are you picking those people rather than the right people? Well we do
produce the statistics between one area. Bearing in mind, our recruitment is all
done by one of our 50 area teams. So we're measuring how many of their people
have been leaving compared with the other areas and so on. So there's a level
of... OK, so you do measure it and you can see it. You measure it as people who
basically have to be asked maybe to move. If recruitment is the most important
job of our field team, the second most important job is to say goodbye to those
that don't fit in. Because no one wants to work alongside a four-hour term. Do
you measure it, Capgemini, Claire? Well we look at how many people are leaving
within three, six, nine months. You know, we track all of that. Can you give me
a rough guide to what proportion of hires are regretted? I couldn't share that.
But is it 2% or 20% or...? Well, certainly if you look at attrition over the
last three years with the pandemic, we saw the great resignation. Everyone's
been talking about it. Lots more movement. If you look at regretted leavers
versus non-regretted leavers, the non-regretted leavers actually are far fewer.
Right. Michael, companies are getting much better at tracking diversity. I don't
know whether companies do, whether they are very good at saying, you know what,
25% of the people in Barrington Associates, as it's recommended to us, turned
out to be done. But this other company, they were sending us better candidates.
Are they good at measuring that? They are getting better. I think it depends on
seniority. So if you look at the C-suites, invariably it's going to take three
to four years before an organisation admits defeat, because obviously the
implications from a shareholder standpoint is obviously there. And
reputationally. I would say at the entry level, decisions around regret can
really sort of get to the point within three months, six months. So I would say
we as an organisation are constantly reviewed. Of your interns that you place in
FTSE 100 companies, what proportion of them managed to get a permanent job?
Super question. So why we set it up, it wasn't actually to get these kids
permanent roles. It was more about life experiences. But having started the
programme two and a half years ago, we're trending at 15 to 20 percent of those
students matriculating out of the programme into permanent roles, which is
incredible. We've talked about so many aspects. There's one more I do just want
to talk about, which is the pool from which you draw. Is one of the ways to
improve both diversity and aptitude to be drawing from a wider pool? So I
suppose it's where do you advertise the job really matters? It might be easy for
you at Capgemini, because I bet you, Claire, that there is somewhere where all
the people you want to employ look and you can advertise there and you always
just know this is the platform on which they'll all be looking. So we just do
that. I wish it was that simple. And I mentioned at the beginning that I applied
via LinkedIn. If that's all we ever do, we'll only get the people that are
present on that platform. So we've got to be more smart than that. We work with
Code Your Future. So they bring refugees into training programmes and bring them
into the organisation. And we're looking at how we can assist transitioning
people who are choosing to leave military service into the working world. We've
got returner programmes, a programme called Relaunch, where we look at people
who've been out of work for a period of time. But these are quite special
programmes to make sure that you're giving opportunities to all. But just in
terms of the general advertising. I think any good recruiter will tell you that
posting and praying isn't the answer. We've got to be present on some job
boards. We've got to have a social media presence and we've got to raise
awareness of the brand. Michael, this seems like a very important way of
improving both diversity and the quality of people in jobs. 100%. And with the
10,000 black interns and 10,000 able interns, we learned a very humble lesson
pretty darn quickly. We initially launched on LinkedIn, the professional
network, and we assume that we're going to get access to underserved and
underrepresented communities. And that wasn't the case. So we moved very much
into Instagram, Twitter. We hire influencers and say, right, apply to 10,000
black interns, apply to 10,000 able interns to be able to get diverse talent
into the process. So it's been a fantastic learning curve. And there are many, I
think we've got 800 firms signed up to 10,000 black interns and 10,000 able
interns. They're also learning a lot from these experiences. There's only so
many seminars, so many coaching sessions that you can do at the C-suite, but if
you can see it and live that experience of some of the diverse talent coming
into these organisations, it does start to make a change. It has been absolutely
fascinating for me listening to the three of you really talk through some of
these issues. Thanks so much for that. My guests, Sir John Timpson from the
Timpson Group, Claire Hamilton from Capgemini and Michael Barrington-Hibbert
from Barrington-Hibbert Associates. To them, thank you for listening. We'll be
back next week. Do join us then. Evan Davis, The Bottom Line was produced by
Simon Chulette. And if you enjoyed this programme, you can subscribe to the
series on BBC Sounds. BBC Sounds. Seven years ago, I was filming East London
Mosque when the story broke. The three schoolgirls from the area had gone
missing. They were heading to Syria to join the Islamic State group. Breaking
news this morning. Three British schoolgirls are reportedly missing. Shamima
Begum was the only one of the girls to emerge from the ashes of the so-called
caliphate. I've retraced her steps from the UK through Turkey and into Syria to
find people who knew her and to investigate the truth of her story. What do you
think people think of you? As a danger, as a risk, as a potential risk. On BBC
Radio 4, The Shamima Begum Story, Series 2 of I'm Not Alone.