TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Our co-editors today were Jack Evans and Purvi Patni. The studio director was
Antonio Fernandes. After the news, it will be Tom Sutcliffe starting the week.
BBC News at 9 o'clock. Rishi Sunak will meet the President of the European
Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, in Berkshire this afternoon to try to finalise
a new deal on trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. The current protocol,
which formed part of the Brexit agreement, resulted in the collapse of power
sharing at Stormont because unionists want Northern Ireland to be treated the
same way as the rest of the UK. The energy regulator Ofgem is expected to
announce a lower price cap for gas and electricity bills for the three months
from April, but because of a reduction in the support from government, typical
households in England, Scotland and Wales could see what they actually pay rise
from the equivalent of about £2,500 a year to £3,000. The head of Citizens
Advice, Dame Claire Moriarty, told Today that ministers should keep the
additional help in place until this summer. In a month's time, bills do go up
hugely as the government withdraws support. The government can keep that support
in place. The energy price guarantee element, that particular way in which it's
supporting everybody, will in practice very likely fall away in another three
months' time. So why wouldn't you continue to provide support that's meaningful
to people for that period? Safety investigators have warned of the significant
stress on doctors, ambulance dispatchers and other health staff in England
caused by long delays in emergency care. NHS England insists it takes staff
wellbeing very seriously, while the government says the number of ambulances and
hospital beds are being increased. The collapsed battery maker British Volt,
which went into administration last month, has been bought by an Australian
company. The new owners will focus initially on batteries for energy storage
rather than electric vehicles. And the fantasy film Everything Everywhere All At
Once has dominated at the Screen Actors Guild Awards in Los Angeles. It won
three of the four individual acting awards and the prize for the best ensemble
cast, increasing the likelihood of Oscar success next month. BBC News. If you're
in the mood for music this morning, why not try the classical mixtape on BBC
Sounds. This is BBC Radio 4, where now it's time to start the week with Tom
Sutcliffe. Hello. What has capitalism ever done for us? Prodigious advances in
global wealth and longevity, some would say. And they have the figures to prove
it. A planet on the brink of ecological disaster and grotesque levels of
inequality, others reply. And they have the figures too. With us on the
programme today, the independent senator Bernie Sanders, who made a run of the
Democratic presidential nomination that had more Conservative party managers
seriously worried. His new book, A Manifesto for a Better America, tells us it's
OK to be angry about capitalism. Martin Wolfe, chief economics commentator for
the Financial Times, isn't so much angry as deeply anxious. His book is called
The Crisis in Democratic Capitalism, and it argues that we should be profoundly
worried about the troubled relationship between free markets and free societies.
And the economist Kate Raworth joins us too, to talk about whether capitalism is
sustainable on a finite planet, or whether we have to replace it with something
else entirely. I'd like to start with a definition of terms, really. And Bernie,
I noticed in your book the cover uses the word capitalism unqualified. I think
I'm right in saying that the text throughout always qualifies it. You talk
either about uber capitalism, an intense form of capitalism, or you talk about
fettered capitalism. Am I to assume from that that it's all capitalism you're
angry with, or just some forms of it? Well Tom, I think what we have seen in
recent years is an incredible level of excess. For example, bosses, owners,
always made more money than their workers. When I was growing up I think the
ratio was maybe 20 or 30 to 1. It is now 400 to 1. There has always been
inequality of course. Today in America there is more income and wealth
inequality than in the history of our country, where you have three people
owning more wealth than the bottom half of American society. There's always been
concentration of ownership, big corporations have had power. Today I believe you
have more concentration of ownership in sector after sector than we've ever
seen. And in politics in America, and some people in the UK may not be familiar
with it, we have in America the best democracy that money can buy. Because
billionaires can now spend unlimited amounts of money buying and selling
politicians. You haven't quite answered my question. Is there a form of
capitalism that would work? It is not my view that the government should run
every mom and pop grocery store in the world. Absolutely not. I respect
innovation, respect small business, but I think we have reached a level of
excess right now that must be dealt with. And Martin Wolfe, you use a lot of
qualifications too. You talk about crony capitalism at times, welfare
capitalism, you talk about democratic capitalism. What's the core definition for
you of what capitalism is? It's interesting that in a way from a different
starting point, I ended up in a fairly close place to Bernice. So I have a broad
definition and then I have a sense of variation, which is both historical and
conceptual. So the broad definition to me is of a market economy. That is to say
one in which decentralized markets operating obviously with the profit motive as
a central element, but not necessarily the only one. It depends what people
bring to it with independent actors, independent of the state, with private
property, which can be organized in very different ways. So that's my general
sense of it. And of course, as we know, over the last 250 years, depends on when
you think it started, you could go back to the Renaissance, but I don't want to
do that. It's institutional forms internally. The corporation, for instance,
came along quite late in this itself. It's a development of the mid 19th century
and its framework, political, moving from oligarchy to democracy or to change or
compatible with capitalism. Kate Raworth, it's a word that always needs some
form of qualification, does it, to refine it and sharpen the definition? Yeah,
well, it's a big word. So I never use it unless I get to define it, because
otherwise we find ourselves talking past each other. So I'm great to have the
chance to define it. To me, capitalism is, yes, it's markets and it's business,
but it's more than that, because those have been around for millennia. To me,
capitalism is an economic system that prioritizes above all delivering profit
for the owners of wealth. And that's in terms of dividends for those who own
stocks and shares in corporations. That's in terms of rent for those who own
land and housing and real estate. And that's in terms of interest for those who
own other people's debt. And the key consequence of this is not just the obvious
that it enriches the already rich. It systematically puts a squeeze on
everything else that we value. So it underpays and undermines waged workers. It
privatizes public goods like health care and transport. It exploits care that's
provided by families and communities. It degrades the living world on which
everything depends. It appropriates land and culture from indigenized and
racialized communities. And crucially, it captures the legal system and the
political system so that it can secure and reproduce its privilege. You clearly
think that there is something absolutely integral to capitalism that leads to
these kind of bad conclusions. And Bernie, I think you would share that. You
described the economic system in the United States as propelled by human greed
and contempt for human decency, which are kind of very strong words. And I
wonder, do you allow for no other motive? You don't allow for the possibility
that somebody would think, yes, this is a flawed system, but it may be the best
way we have. I don't look at it that way, Tom. I mean, I'm not a writer by
trade. I'm a politician. I'm a United States senator from the state of Vermont.
And what I see with my own eyes every day is incredible levels of greed, which I
literally honestly cannot understand. I don't know why if somebody is worth $5
billion, they need to step on other people in order to earn another $5 billion.
Right now, we're dealing with an uptick in labor organizing, people wanting to
form unions in America. And those workers are being met with a tremendously
vicious attack on the part of some of the largest corporations, Amazon,
Starbucks, Apple, others, who are saying, no, we have billions of dollars. We're
not going to give you the right to organize and through illegal activity,
they're crushing union organizing. You say billionaires should not exist in your
book. Absolutely. No kind of billionaire. Look, I don't, and I really don't. You
know, somebody starts a business, they work hard, they create wealth, fine.
They're going to come rich. But how rich do you have to be? Again, in my
country, you got three people who own more wealth than the bottom half of
American society. So yeah, I think we should have a tax system which says, good,
good luck to you. You've made hundreds of millions of dollars. I think that's
enough to live on. I don't think you need $30, $80 billion. Martin Wolf, what's
your view on that? Should billionaires exist? Do they represent, as it were, a
symptom of a system that's going wrong, that they exist at all? Can I comment on
both? Because they're very important. I think it's, I disagree pretty profoundly
with what Kate said. Just clarify it because you... Well, just let me explain
why. Capitalism, to me, was essentially the inverse of that. The pre-capitalist
society was one of unlimited rent extraction by very narrow elites in feudalism,
autocracies, monarchies, in which essentially a very small number of people
truly owned everything. Everybody else was a serf or near a serf. This is a
common recurrent theme. They were the most unequal societies they could be. And
capitalism said, actually, everyone can equally have a go at starting a
business. And many did, and incredibly successful. That's how the Industrial
Revolution happened. You can do the best you can for yourself. And it started
off a process of immeasurable enrichment. And it led, in my view, to democracy.
But this gets to Bernie. It has always had a chronic tendency to excess and
instability. It's a very complex, very complicated, decentralized system. It
needs to be contained by politics. And politics is part of... That's why
democracy is so important in my book. It's the thing that responds to
capitalism. And it's this delicate and complex marriage that we have to manage.
Now, is a billion too much? My view is we should really try to stop wealth
transmission across the generations. And I can see the case for wealth taxes.
But if you start a business which just turns out to be worth $100 billion, and
that's your achievement, I don't have a huge problem with it. What I do have a
problem with, and I agree completely with Bernie on that, is allowing them to
buy politics. Well, we'll come on to that. You may have answered what looked to
me like a discrepancy in your book. On page three, you said that global
capitalism, instead of delivering prosperity and steady progress, has generated
soaring inequality, dead-end jobs, and macroeconomic instability. I turn the
page, and you say that democratic capitalism remains the world's most successful
political and economic system in terms of its proven ability to generate
prosperity, freedom, and measured happiness. Both is true. Both is true. How...
Life isn't simple. No, seriously. No, no, I see that. I think we genuinely live
in our... The US is a bit of an exception. I think we genuinely live today in
the best societies there have ever been. Could they not all... But... Could they
not all... But they could be much better, and if we focus on relevant reforms,
they can be made much better. I suppose... And critics are very important for
that point of view. I suppose my question about that would be that both of those
things could be true over a time scale, but if capitalism eventually drives, as
you said, if it has a chronic instability within it, you will eventually end up
at a place of great inequality, which is where... The inequality and
instability... Well, you could argue that they're related. We had this problem,
and the biggest crisis in capitalism was obviously the 30s, followed by the
Second World War. The Second World War was itself, in my view, a large part a
consequence of the crisis of capitalism. Action was taken, very successful
action in my view. I quote FDR as the dominant figure, the perfect example of an
ameliorationist response to these sorts of crises, and I think they were very
successful. It is clear now that what followed that has not worked as well as
one would have liked, though some enormous successes. We've had the biggest
decline in world poverty in the last 60 years ever, but we can do better. And
we... We can always do better. But we also... I mean, in both your books, you
talk about rising inequality, and really kind of staggering rises in inequality,
not just within countries, between regions, between countries, and also between
kind of populations. I think that when people outside of the United States look
at my country, they think, well, this is the wealthiest country in the history
of the world. And certainly in some respects, it absolutely is. People do not
know that over 60% of Americans today are living paycheck to paycheck. That
means they're working hard, and at the end of the day, have nothing. They don't
know that 85 million Americans, unlike here in the UK, are either uninsured in
terms of health care or underinsured. They don't know that a half a million
Americans are homeless, that we have a child care system which is in total
disarray, that 45 million people who have left higher education have student
debts. So I think the misery and the pain that currently exists in the United
States is not something that we talk about enough, and that is precisely why I
wrote the book. Well, you use the word precariat, I think, kind of based on the
word proletariat. Precariats are people living paycheck to paycheck with no
security, no formal... It means that literally if your car breaks down and you
can't get to work, you'll get fired and you won't be able to take care of your
kids. It means that if you get sick, you are in serious trouble because we don't
have a national health care program. So the point is that despite the great
wealth of the United States, the vast majority of the people are struggling and
living under great stress, which has resulted before COVID in a decline in life
expectancy. Kate Raworth, I want to bring you in because we're not going to do a
lot of kind of academic economic terms here, but I do want to bring you in on
the Kuznets curve, because this relates to this, I think, this idea of
inequality and whether it's integral to capitalism. Can you explain what the
Kuznets curve is and perhaps who Simon Kuznets was? Because that's relevant too,
isn't it? OK. In the 1950s, there was a fantastic economist in the US called
Simon Kuznets, and he gathered a little bit of data that he could find from the
US, the UK and Germany. It was just bare scratchings of information. He put it
together and he said, I think I see a surprising trend. It looks like as
countries get richer, first they get more unequal, but then they seem to get
more equal. Now, in his paper, he said this wasn't what I expected to find. He
thought the rich would get richer and the poor would get left behind. So he
tried to explain it. What is it to do with urban to rural migration? He couldn't
make sense of it. And he said, this is based on probably wishful thinking. I
hope it doesn't lead to any unwarranted dogmatic generalisations. But oh, poor
Simon Kuznets, because that's exactly what happened. It became known as the
Kuznets curve and it underpinned half a century of policy that said, if you care
about inequality, don't try to redistribute it because you might get in the way
of growth. And look, growth evens things up again. Well, growth does not lift
all boats and trickle down does not work. It took Thomas Piketty to come along
in 2014 and say, now we've actually got all the data. It's not at all the case.
It did seem to work for a time, didn't it? It seemed to work in South Korea. It
seemed to work in Indonesia for a period. Thomas Piketty came along. He said
Kuznets was right at that time. It looked like it worked. But you know what? He
was measuring it from before the wars to after the wars. War destroys the
capital of the wealthy. And after the wars, governments invested in health,
education and housing. It was war that evened things up, not the unlimited
growth of the market. But the power of that has carried on. And actually, you
mentioned Indonesia and countries in East Asia, they managed to grow with low
inequality. They disproved the Kuznets curve. So it's such a false idea that
this should inform policymaking today. Even the IMF say, why can't policymakers
get it out of their head? They think there's a trade-off between redistribution
and growth. There isn't. We need actually economies that are equitable. Martin
Woolf, do you want to come in on that? Well, I'm very familiar with the work of
Simon Kuznets, who was a very, very important figure. His hypothesis turned out
to be not true as stated. I agree with that. Interestingly, though this is
probably stopping now, the growth of the last 60 years seems really pretty
clearly because it was so fast in some big emerging countries to actually have
been equalizing for the world, while being dis-equalizing, if we may use that
neology of socialism, for most countries within it. My own view is it's
perfectly clear that you can have rapid growth with reasonable equality. It's
probably helpful, though in Korea, as a country, actually I know quite a bit
about, the equality didn't happen, was a result of the conditions the country
was in after the Korean War and the Japanese occupation. It had nothing to do
with policy as such. But you have a figure in your book, which is very striking,
that in 1820, the average real income of the wealthiest country in the world was
five times the poorest. By 2017, the richest country was 70 times richer than
the poorer. That's absolutely correct. And that reflects the great takeoff of
the 19th century, which was the success of capitalism combined of course with
imperialism. We can discuss how far that had anything to do with it, I think
less than many people think, but that's a complicated issue. But obviously if
you start off, no economic development process is equal. It never is, can't be.
So it started off in basically Western countries, Britain, then America,
Germany, so forth. They started generating 2%, 3% growth in GDP per head, decade
after decade after decade. Well for instance, China, nothing happened under the
Qing and then the chaos. So over time you got these incredibly huge gaps. These
gaps have closed with many countries, but there's one huge outlier, not because
it's a capitalist society, and that's sub-Saharan Africa. That's where the
poorest countries are. Non-development is the biggest problem for inequality. So
it's your view that that gap would eventually close? I think in the case of, not
necessarily. No, it might, but I think looking, that depends on whether the
conditions for rapid growth exist. We know that sometimes societies which are
poor can grow very, very rapidly, but they don't necessarily always do so.
Bernie, I think your view would be that, as it were, winners consolidate their
winners and that these gaps will increase over time. I wish very much, I envy
Martin, because I wish I could be a historian. It sounds like a lot of fun. But
I have a day job, which is to do everything I can to protect a shrinking middle
class in America and a struggling working class and people who are living in
desperation. And all I can tell you, I can't go back to the 1800s or the early
1900s, but I can tell you, according to a not particularly progressive
organization called the Rand Corporation, they suggested that in the last 50
years there has been a $50 trillion transfer of wealth that went from the bottom
90% to the top 1%. And I can tell you that in America today, real inflation
accounted for wages have been more or less stagnant over the last 50 years,
while the billionaire class has become phenomenally richer. So I live, you know,
my job is forcing me to live in the reality of today. And what I will tell you,
there's a class warfare going on in the United States. The wrong class is
winning. One of the things those billionaires spend their money on is the
political process, which brings us back to what Martin's book is about, that
knitting together of democracy. You essentially think you're living in an
oligarchy in America, do you? Of course we are. When you have a handful of
people controlling the economy and controlling or significantly controlling the
political process, I would call that an oligarchy. In America today, and I don't
know how many people in the UK are familiar with the process, but as a result of
a terrible, terrible Supreme Court decision called Citizens United, billionaires
can now legally put money into what's called a super PAC. You can put hundreds
of millions of dollars without disclosure. And this super PAC then puts 30
second ads on television. They essentially elect or defeat candidates that they
like or that they dislike. Now you can talk about that as a democracy. Yes and
no. But it is certainly a flawed democracy, a democracy, which money buys
enormous power. Some might say that billionaires are just spread betting here. I
mean, 230 billionaires contributed to Biden, 133 to Trump. These are figures
from your book. How many contributed to me? Not many, but aren't they just
spread betting? Ah, but then you raise another question, which is quite right.
Of course, I'm not here to tell you the billionaires just contributed to the
Republican Party. That is certainly not the case. You have a two party system,
which is, you know, I caucus with the Democrats, think the Democrats are far
more preferable than the current right wing extremists in the Republican Party.
But anyone who thinks that we don't have both political parties heavily
dominated by big money does not understand American politics. Martin Wolf, this
is exactly what your book is about, this tension between sort of democratic
politics and capitalism. Just explain sort of the kind of core of it. Well,
first of all, I agree completely with Bernie's description of what's happening.
It should be noticed, by the way, when the US Constitution was created, it was
oligarchic from the beginning. I mean, consciously so. So it became sort of
democratic. But the oligarchic elements have always been very, very powerful,
some valuable and some, I think, disastrous. But this description is clearly
correct. So it is obvious that if you want a democracy within a market economy
which generates inequality, which it will, clearly, it's not going to be
perfectly equal. There's no doubt about that. And if you allow money to buy
politics, democracy is fundamentally subverted. The point I make in what we are
trying to do in a society which is both a market economy and a democracy is
separate power from wealth. That's what we're trying to do. What I stress is
that's a historically unprecedented thing to do in a complex society. Normally,
over 8,000 years since the agrarian revolution, wealth and power were the same
thing. We've tried to separate them. And the separation is really hard. But the
crucial thing, and this is, I think, very much in line with what Bernie is
saying, is that, of course, there need to be very tight rules on how money can
be used in politics. I believe in the public financing of political parties, for
example. And I think they need substantial support in many ways. I think the
sort of hidden money that the Americans now tolerate is a catastrophe. And it's
obviously part of why we've got Trump. So my view is it's always about getting
these balances right. There are no perfect systems. And the balance in America
is clearly completely wrong. And that's a core theme of my book. Have we gone
beyond a tipping point, do you think? You referred to the 2010 Citizens United
finding. I mean, the Supreme Court said no. Corporations are, you know, they
have rights to free speech. Can you reverse that? You know, I should say that
it's not just the fact that billionaires buy elections. And Martin talks about
the need to separate the political process from the market economy. I'll give
you another example of the power of big money, which goes beyond just campaigns.
In America, we pay by far the highest prices in the world for prescription
drugs. One out of four people, unbelievably, cannot afford the medicine their
doctors prescribe. We have 535 members of the US Congress, 100 senators, 435
members of the House. There are 1,700 extremely well-paid lobbyists on Capitol
Hill in D.C. demanding that the Congress do nothing to regulate the high price
of prescription drugs. That's power. Well, there's a figure in Martin's book
that... Health in America is obviously the most extreme example of ronchier
capitalism, which I discuss at length in my book, which I think we can all agree
we don't want. Just explain for listeners who aren't familiar with that term
what ronchier capitalism is. Well, it's essentially what Bernie and I think Kate
are talking about, which is a system in which instead of earning money through
producing new products, valuable products which people want, which serve useful
purpose, instead they create monopoly positions. And there are many examples of
that. Financial property rights, patent systems, for example, copyright systems.
I can go through many others, which Bernie hasn't mentioned, are all designed to
extract rent. There's land rent, which is the oldest form of rent, been around
since the agrarian revolution. There's monopoly rent, which comes from the
extraction because, particularly in the tech sector, we get natural monopolies.
They're unregulated. Well, if you've got a core natural monopoly which is
unregulated, it will earn rent, and that is way wealth. And all these must be
dealt with through the political process. I'm absolutely clear about this. I
want to come on to Kate Raworth and doughnut economics. You wrote a book in 2017
called Doughnut Economics. Explain to us what doughnut economics is, because
that's an attempt to come up with an alternative, isn't it? Indeed. I first want
to pick up the point that Martin said that the UK and the US are the best
societies that have ever been. I can't let that go because I profoundly disagree
with that. We live, Bernie and us are from, right, from the UK and the US. Here
we are. We are in two of the richest countries ever in the history of humanity.
And yet, there are people queuing at food banks. There are people sleeping in
the streets. People from sub-Saharan Africa would come here and be appalled and
astounded that we leave people lying, sleeping in the street. And we are
overshooting our pressure on this planet on an extraordinary scale, on climate
breakdown and ecological breakdown. There is absolutely nothing that you can
call developed or advanced about countries that destroy the living world on
which all depends, including the prospects for the whole of sub-Saharan Africa
that now suffers drought and floods because of the breakdown. So we need a new
model. Yes, this is where donut economics comes in. It sounds like a playful
name. It's incredibly serious. It's the one donut you can actually have without
it being bad for you because it's conceptual. So think of a donut that comes
with a hole in the middle. The goal is to leave no one in the hole. Leave no one
falling short on the essentials of life without health and education and housing
and voice. Get everybody out of the hole. But at the same time, don't overshoot
that outer ring because that's where we put so much pressure on the life support
systems of our planetary home. We destroy the only known living planet in the
universe. It's pretty simple and hard to disagree with, I hope. Meet the needs
of all people within the means of the living planet. For me, this is the
starting point of 21st century economics. When I studied economics at university
30 years ago, it never had a goal. The goal was implicit and it was endless
growth. We need an explicit goal. And if we start there and say what kind of
economy would be in service to meeting the needs of all people within the means
of the living planet? Now we're in a completely different conversation. And to
me, the goal is not generating profit for the owners of wealth. The goal is to
be going from a degenerative economy that we've inherited to becoming
regenerative of the earth and the living systems from the deeply divisive
economy that we've just been describing make it one that's distributive by
design. And that is an exciting 21st century economic project. If I may jump in
and agree with Kate and to talk about the kind of insane greed that now exists.
60 years ago, the fossil fuel industry was told by their scientists that the
carbon emission that they are producing would result in terrible destruction to
the planet. So it wasn't that they were ignorant of what they were doing. They
learned about it. And the scientists said, hey, you got a real problem here. You
know what they did? They lied. They put millions of dollars into phony front
organizations as well. We're not sure about climate change. Maybe it takes place
every million years, maybe it's cyclical, whatever it may be. They lied, they
lied, they lied. And in the process, they laid the groundwork for massive
destruction to this planet. So that is what excessive greed is doing. And I
think Kate is quite right that we have to rethink the nature of economics today.
I thought you were going to come in on the word growth there, which remains a
word that has kind of great political potency. Are we beyond that point now or
should we be beyond the point where growth is the only metric? Martin Wolf. I
don't think I discussed this. I don't think it should be the only metric. There
are obviously lots of others. I don't think we can produce, put it into one
metric. I think it's very problematic, though some people have tried. I think
it's I don't actually really feel that the issue of whether growth is the goal
is as central as people suppose. Growth is the outcome, inevitable outcome over
time of a decentralized market system because people are going to look for new
ways of doing things in the process. They're going to find investments. They're
going to do investments. There will be net investment. There will be growth.
That's what happens. So the really crucial question is how you stop it and what
sort of society will be able to stop it. Now I think the probably my profound
difference, I actually understand a lot of what Kate is arguing, but my view is
the only sort of society that could actually actually achieve what she seems to
want worldwide is a global dictatorship. I can't see any other way of getting
there. Well, let's have a thing. And the let me just give one little
illustration of this. So we've agreed or two of us have agreed that we are
living in a terrible world. So right now, our real GDP per head average in the
UK and other developed countries is three times the global average, which from
which it follows that roughly 80 percent of you, 85 percent of humanity on
average living well below it. And some, as you already said, are far below it.
Now, this new no growth static economy can't be sold to the rest of the world if
we don't give up our excess, which is two thirds of our national average income.
I just don't imagine how you're going to persuade people in this country, for
example, that actually not only do they have to give up growth, actually, we
have to shrink our economy even more to achieve this, but actually give away
most of it to subsidies. I have a completely ethically understandable,
completely impossible. OK, well, let's we're coming towards the end of the
program now. We should talk about, as it were, what forms of regulation might
work. I mean, no Victorian engineer would have built a steam engine without a
regulation system in place because they knew it would shake itself to pieces in
the end. So what what forms of regulation might work? Well, in the book, I pick
up on a speech that Franklin Delano Roosevelt gave in 1944. And what he said is,
we are very proud in America of our political rights, the nature of our
democracy, Bill of Rights, etc. But he also said that you cannot be really free
unless you have economic rights as well, guaranteeing economic rights. What does
it mean? Healthcare is a human right. We can do that. We can do that in the UK.
You have your problems. You can improve it. We can do that in the United States.
Every man, woman, a child. We can make education from childcare through graduate
school public and free. We can do that, at least for the public universities. We
can make sure that all people have affordable housing. We can provide the basic
necessities of life to all people and let the market do its thing. And every
person on this planet is entitled to decent nutrition, decent housing, decent
education, decent healthcare. And if we can achieve that, we will take in
humanity a giant step forward. But the mechanism for that is taxation, in your
view, and redistributive taxation. Government must play a very important role in
making sure that all people have the basic necessities of life. Yes. I think
it's crucial to recognize just one tension. I don't want to get through all my
points. We have to decide whether we're focusing on our nations or the world.
And the implications are very, very radical. So I think what Bernie's really
focusing on, and I've got this, is to give America a decent welfare state. And I
think that's a completely understandable goal from a European point of view.
It's a completely different proposition to say we want to give the entire world,
everybody in the world, the many health, education, basic income, and so forth.
Because given the productivity levels of a very large part of the world, that
involves colossal ongoing transfers from us, the richest country, to the rest of
the world. Now, I can see the ethics of that. If you accept that every
individual is equally valuable and nationality doesn't matter, that makes sort
of sense. But there's no political framework for doing this, and it will never
happen. Kate, that's a rather pessimistic view. So I want to come in with
something optimistic, because I think there is a very different economy
possible. And I don't think it's a return to feudalism. I don't think we have to
look to communism or, indeed, global dictatorship. I think we can democratize
the economy. First, public goods provide public provisioning, right? Education,
transport, make it provided by the public sector. But when it comes to the world
of business, we can change and transform the world of business by changing its
deep design. And I mean changing the purpose of a company. It is not here to
maximize returns for the shareholders. You may never step on the premises. They
may buy and sell the shares in the day. Why should their interest be put first?
No, let's give business a purpose, as it always has been possible to do. It's
here to make good livelihoods for people. It's here to restore the living world.
It's here to build community, to produce things people need. So we need to
democratize the ownership by having companies that are owned and governed by
those directly with a stake. I'm talking about employee-owned companies or
cooperatively owned. I'm talking about putting workers on the board, putting
supply chain on the board, putting nature on the board. Companies have started
putting nature on the board and saying, what would nature ask for this business
to do? Of course, a company must make a profit. Not a lot of companies. I mean,
I think you're talking about Patagonia. I'm talking about faith in nature. I'm
talking about the cutting edge. Can we look at the cutting edge? You need an
altruistic oligarch to make that happen, don't you? To take the company and say,
this is what I'm going to do with it. I don't think you need an altruistic
oligarch. Most people have a purpose. I don't think we are born full of greed.
When you go to university, you're taught about rational economic man. You're
taught that economics is about profit and competition and self-interest. And I
teach students in business schools right at the moment. And so many of them are
like, oh, apparently I'm a bit naive. I have to toughen up and be great. It
creates this greed in us. Look, we can create companies and they exist all over
the world that are set up to deliver for their employees. They're set up to
repair the world. They are owned by those with a vested interest in the company
and they pursue purpose. Employee-owned companies, right? They don't get
financed by capital markets because they won't return their quarterly returns to
the capital markets. They build slowly, they last long, and they focus on the
purpose that they serve. If we redemocratize the ownership of business, we are
transforming capitalism and we're transforming away from capitalism because
we're no longer pursuing endless profit. Martin Wool. This is a complicated
subject. I have sympathy in some respect, but it is worth remembering, again, as
with so many things, there have been experiments. Yugoslavia had worker-managed
companies. And I follow that quite closely because it really interested me. The
system collapsed. And there are quite profound reasons why it did. The
incentives that are created by having an employer, employees run them, is, for
example, they want to share the rent too, and they won't accept new entrants
into the firm because maximizing the wages becomes their objective. That happens
to be the case. And you can't eliminate capital markets because we actually need
new capital in new business. That's what allows them to grow really rapidly. And
you want, Kate warns, really new things to happen quickly. Well, that's going to
take new businesses growing a lot. And by the way, this starts off with mass
expropriation, which people are going to resist. So I think it's just much more
complicated. The ideas are bewitching in some ways, and some of it we should do,
but it's not the answer. I don't think you're talking about mass expropriation,
are you? You're talking about... Well, we're talking about a progressive tax
system. Some may call that mass expropriation. But the idea, look, we are living
in 2023, not 1923, not 1823. We have extraordinary technology. We're looking at
artificial intelligence. We're looking at robotics. So I think the question that
Kate is posing is given all of that, given the threat that climate change poses
the very existence to this planet, it's time to rethink economics. And I like
the idea of worker ownership is something I have believed in a long time,
managed to get a $50 million authorization to help workers figure out how they
can own the plants that they live. But I think it is absolutely the moment, I
don't know that we have too many choices given climate, to rethink economics. We
need to change the culture so that business people say, look, it's important to
produce some product, pay your workers a decent wage, involve them in the
process, protect the environment. It cannot simply be profit, profit, profit.
I've been involved in a dozen strikes in the last year. It has astounded me that
these companies are making record-breaking profits, continue to push down their
workers time and time again. Quite unbelievable. Is this a matter of political
will too? I mean, I was thinking, Teddy Roosevelt did introduce antitrust laws.
I mean, he took on big corporations, the Amazons of their day and said... And he
put a tax on the states, as a matter of fact. He worried about excessive wealth
concentration. Teddy Roosevelt back in the early part of the 20th century. Yes.
I just like to say for the record, it's capitalism that began with mass
expropriation, enclosing the commons and a century of colonialism. And it
continues today. I'm not talking about mass appropriation. I'm talking about
when companies, when the founder of a company retires, does he sell it to the
capital markets or does he pass it on to his employees? That is a trend. Wales
aims to double employee-owned companies by 2026. Scotland has a goal. America...
Isn't it a trend, though, that depends on owners who like that idea? Well, a lot
of the owners of companies actually really care about the company they created
and they don't want to see it eaten up by capital markets. So I think there are
people who have purpose and want the economic system to be serving purpose. The
studies that are out there suggest that people who work and work or own
industries are much more productive, much more content, have a better quality of
life. Martin, you've got 25 seconds. We have a climate crisis. We're not going
to wait to redesign the world. We have to have a war type approach to how we're
going to deal with it, targeted on this. And the only solutions, I'm afraid,
will be technological. Okay. Well, we've run out of time, I'm afraid. Thank you
to all of my guests. Kate Raworth, the author of Donut Economics, Bernie
Sanders' book It's Okay to be Angry about Capitalism, and Martin Wolf's The
Crisis of Democratic Capitalism are both out now. Many thanks to today's studio
engineer, Bob Nettles. Next week, it is 20 years since the Iraq war. Kirsty Wark
discusses its legacy. But for now, thank you and goodbye. Start the Week was
presented by Tom Sutcliffe and produced by Katie Hickman. If you'd like to
listen to previous Start the Weeks, they're all available on BBC Sounds. In a
moment here on Radio 4, we'll hit some of the stories hidden behind headstones
all over the country. A tomb with a view is our new book of the week. That's
coming up after this. BBC Sounds Seven years ago, I was filming East London
Mosque when the story broke. After three schoolgirls from the area had gone
missing, they were heading to Syria to join the Islamic State group. Breaking
news this morning, three British schoolgirls are reportedly missing. Shamima
Begum was the only one of the girls to emerge from the ashes of the so-called
caliphate. I've retraced her steps from the UK through Turkey and into Syria to
find people who knew her and to investigate the truth of her story. What do you
think people think of you? As a danger, as a risk, as a potential risk. On BBC
Radio 4, the Shamima Begum story, series 2 of I'm Not a Monster. Listen on BBC
Sounds. Now on Radio 4, we begin a new Book of the Week, where the writer Peter
Ross uncovers the stories of Britain's graveyards. Andy Clark reads A Tomb with
a View. I grew up in graveyards. The dead were my quiet companions. Not silent
though. They announced themselves with great formality. You only had to read the
stones. Here lays the corpse of Mary Dickey, who died December 18th, 1740, aged
three years and nine months. Suffer the little children to come unto me. That's
one I remember from the Old Town Cemetery in Stirling. I'd spent whole summers
there, trying to catch tadpoles in the small pond called Pithy Mary. Those
graves laid out in rows. They were shelves full of stories. I was a shy boy,
living inside myself, living in books. Treasure Island, The Hound of the
Baskervilles. Headstones were just more tales. I would wander among them,
reading the inscriptions, poking a soft finger into the socket of a stone skull.
I'd look at the names and wonder, did John Barnes, hairdresser, who died aged 67
in January 1891, ever take comb and scissors to Ebenezer Gentleman, who died in
1868, and whose crooked stone lies a step or two away? That was the thing about
graveyards. They felt like, feel like, treasure houses of stories. What draws me
is the extraordinary tales of ordinary folk. Deep within the cracked stone ribs
of Dundrennan Abbey, a beautiful medieval ruin in southern Scotland, there's a
graveyard. It grew up in the centuries after the church was abandoned. This is
the British Empire squashed into one little place, said Glyn Macken, the
custodian of the abbey. He pointed out the graves of a young man who died at
Gallipoli in 1915, and a young woman who died at sea. Her stone says, with an
E.M. Forster touch, on her passage from India in 1852. One grave sheltered in
the northeast corner caught my eye. Within the top curve of the headstone was a
cherub. Wind and rain and time had worn away its colours, but enough paint
remained to show that its hair was blonde, its wings white, its smiling face a
boyish pink. This is the resting place of Douglas Crosby, who died in 1789, aged
seven, of a broken heart, or so the story goes. This grave is known as The Boy
and the Snake, Glyn said. He read a verse carved into the stone. He was a manly
pretty boy, his father's hope, his mother's joy, but death did call and he must
go, whether his parents would or no. Douglas Crosby lived at New Law Farm,
inland from Dundrennan. Every morning that summer he'd take his bowl of porridge
to eat in the garden. His mother thought little of it until one day she
overheard him say, with amused crossness, keep to your own side of the plate.
She went outside and saw the boy sitting on the grass. An adder was coiled
beside him, eating from the bowl, and as she watched, Douglas reached out his
spoon and tapped the snake on the top of the head. The creature moved to the
other side of the bowl and the pair continued to share breakfast. Horrified, she
called the boy in and shouted for her husband. The adder had slithered off into
the longer grass, but the farmer, beating around with a stick, found it and
clubbed it to death. Young Douglas grieved for his best friend and did not live
long without it. There's nothing on his stone to connect the grave to the story,
no mention at all of a snake, never mind porridge, and yet the story clings to
it like lichen, a living thing growing on the dead. There are an estimated
14,000 cemeteries and churchyards in the UK. Many of them are full, or close to
full, with new internments no longer permitted. It's also true that fewer and
fewer people actually want to be buried in them. Many quarters of us in the UK
are cremated and our remains are often scattered in a favourite spot rather than
being interred. Dr Julian Lytton is the UK's leading expert on the history of
funeral customs. He's been described as a man who has sniffed the air in a
hundred burial vaults, yet when we met he didn't seem sepulchral. Perhaps it was
his orange jumper, orange tie, orange and white striped shirt, orange jumbo
cords and two-tone tan brogues. He was the founder in 1991 of the Friends of
Kensal Green, the oldest of London's magnificent seven cemeteries, those grand
Victorian cemeteries which encircle the city. The others are Abney Park, Tower
Hamlets, Nunhead, West Norwood, Brompton and Highgate. Dr Lytton's fascination
with graveyards goes back to a childhood in Wolverhampton when he would take the
bus to Merrydale Cemetery. He enjoyed the solitude and the stories on the
stones. He's planned his own funeral in every detail. Not for him a cremation.
Barbaric, he called it. It will be a burial in Kensal Green, of course. The
General Cemetery of All Souls, Kensal Green, was founded in 1833 and was such a
success that it entered the wider culture. G.K. Chesterton wrote in his 1913
poem, The Rolling English Road, There is good news yet to hear and fine things
to be seen, Before we go to paradise by way of Kensal Green. For my part, I went
by way of the Harrow Road, past Iranian grocers, Polish tyre dealers and an old-
fashioned caf offering a builder's breakfast. Kensal Green's reputation as what
Julian Lytton calls the Belgravia of Death was established in 1843 when the Duke
of Sussex, the sixth son of George III, was laid to rest here. Where royalty
led, the establishment followed. Viscounts and vice-admirals, masters and
commanders. Kensal Green became a prestigious place to be buried. It's England's
Valhalla, Dr Lytton had said. The list of famous names is remarkable. You could
read your way around its 72 acres. Wilkie Collins, Anthony Trollope, William
Makepeace Thackeray, or curate your own science and engineering tour. Charles
Babbage, Isambard Kingdom Brunel. It's extraordinary to think that Vanity Fair
and the Great Western Railway began as visions within brains, within skulls,
within this soil. The London Garden Cemetery movement, of which Kensal Green was
the first fruit, grew out of a crisis. The city's churchyards were full to
overflowing. London's population in 1801 was approximately 960,000. Forty years
later it had grown to two million. There were a great many more Londoners and a
great many more dead. In 1843 a government report declared that 50,000 people
were being buried each year in 203 acres of ground. These statistics don't quite
convey what this meant in the churchyards themselves. For that we have
Gatherings from Graveyards, a polemic written in 1839 by George Alfred Walker, a
surgeon and apothecary. He argued that London's stinking air emanated from
overcrowded churchyards. The pestiferous exhalations of the dead, he wrote, were
causing disease and death among those who lived and worked nearby. Alfred
Walker, as he was known, argued that the government should close the churchyards
and inner city vaults of the capital, and that Londoners should be buried
instead in new large cemeteries at a safe distance from population areas.
Charles Dickens gives us a flavour, or rather whiff, of the London burial
grounds in his masterpiece Bleak House. When the law writer Nemo dies from an
opium overdose, he's buried in a shallow grave in a hemmed-in churchyard,
pestiferous and obscene. The air is so poisoned that it leaves a slimy coating
on the iron gate. Burial in shallow graves, sometimes only two feet deep, was
widespread, and space was at such a premium that it was quite usual for bodies
to be exhumed before they'd properly decomposed in order to make room for the
next occupant. John Iles, a gravedigger for the churchyard of St Clement's,
recalled recognising his own father's head when his coffin was broken open by
workmates. I knew him by his teeth, he said. One tooth was knocked out and the
other splintered. I knew it was my father's head, and I told them to stop, and
they laughed. In the end, changes in the law did come. The burial grounds of the
inner cities of England and Wales closed, and large new cemeteries opened in
what were, at that time, areas of low population density. Kensal Green, as the
first cemetery of that type in London, was the model. It was, according to one
commentator, a beautiful garden of death. The idea was that such places would be
more than conveniences for the disposal of remains. They would be showcases of
wealth and taste, triumphs of architecture. To walk in Kensal Green now is to
sense the vanity and economic power of the 19th century rendered in stone. Is
Victorian Britain ossified? It's the grand monuments which catch the eye, like
the colonialist tomb of Major General Sir William Casement, which appears to be
borne aloft by four grim figures and turbans, or William Mulrady, the celebrated
Irish painter, who lies in effigy atop his own grave, as if reclining upon a
bed. The natural response to all this faded grandeur is, they don't make them
like that any more. But, just sometimes, they still do. Mehdi Mehra is a
57-year-old Iranian businessman. He owns a property company with his wife Mary-
Anne. In 2015, their 11-year-old son Mehdi died in a riding accident. According
to Islamic tradition, he was buried within 24 hours of his death. Sitting at the
graveside in the splintered days that followed, Mr Mehra had a vision. I could
see this place completely as it is now in my mind. He built around his son's
grave a memorial on a scale the Victorians would recognise. It's a half circle,
30 metres long by 14 deep and 8 high. The 21 Corinthian columns give it a neo-
classical look, but there are Islamic touches. God is great in Arabic, as well
as Christian. The doors at the corners and doorways hold torches, books and
flowers. The memorial has a crown of girders rather than a roof. However, a
gazebo erected inside keeps the weather off those who come to sit. Mr Mehra's
parents are buried here, and he will be himself when his time comes. The
centrepiece is Mehdi's burial plot, but one could mistake it for something else.
It is essentially a flowerbed, planted with roses and pelargoniums and lilies in
whites, pinks and yellows. Butterflies glide past a life-size bronze statue of
Mehdi, sitting on a bench. The sculptor has depicted him wearing school uniform
and carrying a football. One casual arm is draped over the back of the bench.
Perhaps this is what Keats meant by easeful death. A young lad taking the air
next to his own grave. When Mehdi died, Mr Mehra visited the grave every day,
all day, for four years. I just didn't want to do anything else, he said. The
business, everything. I just couldn't deal with it. When I left this place, I
would shake and want to come back. Mehdi's mother doesn't visit here, Mr Mehra
explained. She finds it upsetting. She honoured her son's memory in a different
way, building a pipeline to bring water to 18,000 people in Ethiopia. The
enormity of what has been built was my husband's initiative, she told me. I
think the beauty eases the pain. Mr Mehra's idea for the memorial was that it
should attract others. It should be a place to work through one's problems. It's
very common, he says, to find people sitting on one of the stone benches amid
the scent of flowers. People who had no connection with the family, but who are
drawn to the place. We talked about time. I wanted something to last, he said,
long after I've gone. After his own death, it could continue to be a place where
people could come and sit and think. Those stone angels would still stand guard.
Aileen McCready Clark was reading A Tomb with a View by Peter Ross. The book was
abridged by Anna Magnusson and the producer is Aileen McCready. Tomorrow Peter
is faced with the unsettling power of sacrifice and martyrdom when he visits the
Milltown Cemetery in Belfast. That's tomorrow morning at the same time. Radio
4's Lent Talks for 2023. Six reflective moments. We are making changes to the
way BBC live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms and
the BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If
you are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message,
please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this
service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. Lent Talks begins this Wednesday
evening at 8.45.