TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 We'll be hearing from a curator at the V&A Museum in London. They've just
acquired some of David Bowie. You're listening to Today. Good morning. It's 8
o'clock on Thursday, the 23rd of February. You're listening to Today with Amal
Rajan in London and Meenik Robinson in Berlin. The headlines this morning,
Labour is setting out five national missions that will shape the party's
election manifesto and guide its policy if it wins power. Political leaders have
condemned a gun attack in Oma that left a police officer with critical injuries.
Ministers have announced a major shake-up of the governance of English football,
including the establishment of its first independent regulator. And a treasure
trove of David Bowie memorabilia covering his whole career has been gifted to
the nation. The BBC News is read this morning by Chris Aldridge. Sir Keir
Starmer is launching what he calls five national missions, outlining his plans
for the UK if Labour wins the next general election. The commitments will be
formally announced during a speech in Manchester this morning, where the Labour
leader will say that new thinking is needed to tackle the root causes of the
UK's problems. Our political correspondent Helen Catt reports. Labour says its
five missions will be unashamedly long-term, an alternative to what it calls the
sticking plaster solutions of Rishi Sunak's five priorities for government. The
first two missions will be to secure the highest sustained economic growth in
the G7 and to make Britain a clean energy superpower. The party has already
announced a target of making electricity zero carbon by 2030. Sir Keir will say
that his missions are not just another word for priorities or promises, but
would form a different way of governing, bringing together government
departments, businesses, trade unions and civil society. Labour will unveil
goals for its final three missions, building an NHS fit for the future, making
Britain's streets safe and breaking down barriers to opportunity in the coming
months. Sir Keir will describe it as a long-term plan to unlock Britain's pride
and purpose. Rishi Sunak has joined politicians in Northern Ireland in
condemning the shooting of an off-duty police officer at a sports complex in Oma
in County Tyrone last night. He's in a critical but stable condition in
hospital. The prime minister said he was appalled by the disgraceful attack. Our
Ireland correspondent Chris Page is at the scene this morning. A police car is
guarding the entrance to the complex called Youth Sport. The main building and a
number of pitches are cordoned off. Several other police vehicles are in the car
park, where forensic officers have been carrying out searches. Local people say
the centre was busy when the shooting happened. Children, parents and coaches
were at the site. It's believed two gunmen were involved in the attack. The
victim was a detective of senior rank. He's led investigations into organised
crime and dissident Republicans who are opposed to the peace process. This work
means he has a public profile in Northern Ireland. Police haven't said anything
officially yet about a motive. The last time an officer was murdered in this
part of the UK was in Oma in 2011, when Constable Ronan Kerr was killed by a
booby-trap bomb. A former police ombudsman for Northern Ireland, Lady Alone,
told us it would take some time for people in Oma to get over what happened. We
saw these things in the past. We had hoped they would never happen again. And we
know that the children, the young people, they'll carry the scar of this with
them. It's not something they'll ever forget. The government has confirmed plans
to establish the first independent regulator of men's football in England. The
regulator, which was recommended in a fan review last year, will aim to make
clubs financially resilient. It'll also have backstop powers to impose financial
settlements, meaning it could force the Premier League to share more money with
the lower divisions if an agreement can't be reached between the leagues. The
chair of the English Football League, Rick Parry, told us he welcomed the
government's plan, but called for greater clarity on wealth distribution. We
don't think that backstop powers on redistribution are sufficient, because if we
don't solve redistribution, what is the regulator going to do? Is he going to
put two-thirds of our clubs out of business, refuse to give them a licence when
the objective is to keep them alive? So there is an imbalance there. The sports
minister, Stuart Andrew, told us he disagreed with the idea that the regulator
should force a financial settlement from the beginning. We still believe that
the best solution would be a football-led solution. But if they do not come to a
deal, the regulator will have powers at their disposal to, first of all, try and
bring about arbitration. But if that doesn't work either, they will come up with
the solution that is in the best interests of the whole of the football pyramid.
The cases of 12,000 asylum seekers are to be fast-tracked by the Home Office to
try to fulfil Rishi Sunak's pledge to reduce the backlog of applications by the
end of the year. Migrants from Afghanistan, Eritrea, Libya, Syria, and Yemen
will have their claims decided on the basis of a 10-page questionnaire, which
must be completed in English within 20 days. Here's our Home Editor, Mark
Easton. The Home Office insists this is not an asylum amnesty, but a way to
streamline the processing system for five nationalities which have an asylum
acceptance rate of more than 95%. All the usual security and criminal checks
will be conducted and biometrics taken. But for the first time, a cohort of
12,000 asylum seekers will not be required to attend a face-to-face interview.
Instead, if they applied for asylum before last July, they must fill out a form.
The Home Office is likely to face criticism that the fast-tracking has more to
do with the Prime Minister's promise to eradicate the asylum backlog than having
rigorous checks for identifying individuals with no right to be in the UK.
However, the British Red Cross is among organisations concerned that insisting
asylum seekers complete a questionnaire in English and return it within 20 days
could increase the suffering of already traumatised individuals. The United
Nations looks likely to approve a resolution calling for Russia to withdraw
immediately from Ukraine. The vote, which isn't legally binding, is due to be
held in New York later, on the eve of the first anniversary of the conflict.
Israel has carried out airstrikes on targets in the Gaza Strip after rockets
were fired from the territory. The attacks are the latest escalation in the
conflict, after 11 Palestinians were killed in an Israeli raid on Nablus in the
occupied West Bank yesterday. Our Middle East correspondent, Yolande Nell,
reports from Jerusalem. At dawn, rockets fired from Gaza left trails of smoke
across the sky of southern Israel. There were small explosions as most were
intercepted by Israel's Iron Dome defence system. Shortly afterwards, Israeli
warplanes hit what the military said were Hamas militant sites. Both Hamas and
Islamic Jihad had issued threats of retaliation after the earlier deadly raid in
Nablus. Israeli forces had entered the busy old city in the morning in what they
said was an operation to arrest a number of wanted Palestinians, and were
quickly caught up in a gun battle with armed fighters. Several Palestinian
gunmen and civilians were among those killed. Local hospitals have been
struggling to treat dozens of people who were injured, many with bullet wounds.
Washington, which has been trying to ease spiralling tensions, has said it's
extremely concerned by the levels of violence. A report is warning that staff
shortages, rising costs, and lengthening waiting lists are jeopardising the
Scottish Government's plan to help the NHS recover from the pandemic. The public
spending watchdog Audit Scotland says ministers need to be more transparent with
the public about the unprecedented challenges. Scotland's Health Secretary,
Humza Yousaf, said the government had never hidden the scale of the task and the
recovery would take years, not months. New draft rules clamping down on
relationships between university staff and students have been published by the
Regulator in England. The Office for Students is consulting on the plans as part
of efforts to tackle sexual harassment and misconduct on campuses. Here's our
education editor, Branwen Jefferies. Under these plans, any university lecturer
supervising a student would have to declare if they started a relationship. The
information would be recorded on a register. A failure to report could lead to
dismissal for the academic. Some universities, including University College
London and Nottingham, already enforce a total ban on such relationships. It's a
step the Office for Students says it would prefer not to take, but progress on
these issues has been slow and inconsistent. The National Union of Students said
there was a reluctance to report misconduct because of a fear of grades being
affected. David Bowie's personal archive has been purchased for the nation by
the Victoria and Albert Museum. The collection, which comprises more than 80,000
items, including photographs, notebooks, costumes and instruments, will be
housed in a purpose-built venue in East London. Our music correspondent, Mark
Savage, has the details. There's a star man waiting in the sky... From the
famous Ziggy Stardust costumes.....to the stylophone he played on Space Oddity,
David Bowie's archive takes you on a journey through the creative life of one of
rock's biggest innovators. Can you hear him in my head? Kate Bailey, a senior
curator at the V&A, is one of the few who's already seen it. I found it
fascinating, the personal insights, the handwritten lyrics, the notebooks, the
dialogue with other creative practitioners in terms of how a song is recorded.
All of these things are incredibly rich and powerful. The archive will be opened
to the public in two years' time. Mark Savage reporting. Chris, thank you very
much indeed. The time now is ten past eight. And as you heard from Chris, our
lead story this morning is Sir Keir Starmer's launch of five national missions.
And he joins us now from Salford. Sir Keir, good morning. Good morning. Three
things I'd like to do with you, if possible, in the time we've got. First,
understand what the public is looking for. What is the public looking for? What
is the public looking for? And then, if possible, I'd like to ask you, if
possible, in the time we've got, first, understand a bit more about the thinking
behind your speech today. Second, scrutinise the evolution of that thinking. And
then third, maybe get some views on some of the other issues in the news. Are
you feeling amenable? That all sounds good. Thank you very much. Great. Right.
We've outlined already in the News Bulletin your five priority areas. And you
say this is about a whole new way of governing. We've heard that before many
times. Why is this time different? Because what you've said is what we're going
to do in government. So that is the mission, the five missions, to give us
focus, to give us purpose, and to give us drive. But alongside the what is also
the how are you going to do this? What does a mission-driven government look
like? Why is that different? And in terms of the thinking behind it, I think the
best way I can express it is this, that I think for many people, there's a
general sense that things are just not working, that we're on the side or off,
and that we go round and round in circles. And two quick examples of that, we
have had now for the last 13 years a NHS winter crisis. And every year, it gets
worse. Every year, we just about get through. There's a sticking plaster that
gets us into the summer. We just about survive. And we breathe for a bit in the
summer, and then we go back into another winter crisis. And we never fix the
fundamentals. We go round and round like this forever if we don't fix the
fundamentals. Another example, just to go somewhere else, is obviously with
energy prices, we've suggested there should be an energy price freeze paid for
by a windfall tax. But we can't go round and round doing that over and over
again. We need a longer-term solution. So the missions are about saying, yes, we
recognise that a government has to answer the question, what are you going to do
now, this winter for the NHS, spring for energy prices, but what's the long-term
fixing the fundamentals that gives a country that sense of purpose? I feel we've
been in a sort of crouched position as a country for many years, unable to go
forward. Thank you. And on the windfall tax, that is a specific policy. But the
thing about this document is that it is extraordinarily reticent about detail. I
mean, talk is cheap. It's very easy to say, as you do, you want the highest
sustained growth in the G7. I mean, who doesn't? But you don't actually say how
you're going to do it. You said a moment ago that you get into how you're going
to do it. You don't at all in the document. There's nothing whatsoever about how
you're going to achieve that. Well, just on that, firstly, the mission needs to
be ambitious. It needs to- Obviously, everyone who wants to be prime minister is
going to say you've got to be ambitious as a country. I mean, that's literally
verbiage. No, no, it absolutely isn't. If you take missions, let's take that
first one, the highest sustained growth in the G7, that is going to be tough.
Nobody's going to say that's vague, that's something that's easily achievable.
Just let me finish on the missions, and I'll come straight to your point. And
NHS is actually fit for the future. Not just to get through this winter, but for
the next 75 years. Safe streets, removing the barriers to opportunity for every
child everywhere, and then a clean energy superpower, which means clean
electricity by 2030. Again, that's a sharp intake of breath. When I talk to CEOs
and others about this, they say, that's going to be going some care. So the
missions are not vague. They are very clear. They're ambitious. To take on your
challenge, what sits underneath these missions are the specifics. What then are
you going to do to get this to happen? And so we have the specific, I don't
know, the columns, if you like, that hold the missions up. And then what I'm
going to set out this morning in my speech is then, what are the first steps
along the journey? So you can see the tangible steps. So these reflect a lot of
hard thinking, as I've talked to various people across the country about what
the real problems are. A sense of how we fix it, but then a programme of action,
including those first specific steps. But just to take your challenge head on,
all I ever have had in the last three years as Labour leader is, what are you
going to do about it here and now? I'm not interested in the long term. If we
don't train more doctors for the NHS, we will be in the same cycle for a very,
very long time. And it's time somebody rolled their sleeves up and said, we're
going to fix the fundamental. I was trying to avoid a situation where you had to
list your five priorities, because I did say at the beginning we've already got
them in the news bulletin. But that's OK. You've successfully used up a bit more
time. So I'm going to get slightly more interrupting henceforth. As a decorated
lawyer, I do wonder if you should be a bit worried about crimes against the
English language. Because we spent the witching hours reading this work. And
Hemingway, it ain't. At the bottom of page four, under the heading, Organising
Government Around a Shared Vision, you say, you write, this could mean new
structures and ways of working to facilitate collaboration, including replacing
some of the cabinet committees with new delivery-focused, cross-cutting mission
boards. Who's going to vote for that? Well, I'll tell you what people will vote
for. They'll vote for someone who will fix it. No, no, tell me who's going to
vote for that. Someone who wants the problem fixed. And what does it mean?
Someone who wants the problem fixed. Let me give you, and I know you don't like
the language, but look, I ran the prosecution service for five years. I know
that amongst the problems I had was that it was in a silo. If you want to reduce
crime, you have to get to grips with your education system. You have to
recognise the mental health element to it. You have to recognise the health
element to it. You have to recognise that the single biggest indicator of
whether someone's going to end up in prison is whether they had difficulties at
primary school and whether they were excluded at secondary school. To get to the
bottom of that problem, you've got to have cross-cutting. You may not like the
word cross-cutting, but I'll tell you what, everybody I've spoken to, in the
streets where they are, they say, Keir, if you've got a way of actually reducing
crime where I live, then I'm up for a discussion about that. And me pretending
that, oh, well, because of the language, we'd better not do it, it's a bit
difficult to explain. It's a bit complicated. No, it's not. Just that. We just
try. We just want to understand. We just want to understand what you mean. I sat
in the back of magistrates' courts watching the same process go around year
after year after year. I want to break that. OK, let's move on. If somebody
wants to change the language a little bit, but the determination, the drive and
passion I have to actually change and fix the fundamentals is huge. I'm not
going to be knocked off course by people saying, well, I don't like a particular
word. It's the idea that matters. No, it's not the word. I read the whole
document. But let's move on to your leadership more broadly, if I may. You said
you want to restore trust in politics. Why should people trust you when you've
abandoned so many of the pledges that you made in your leadership campaign?
These missions. No, no, no, no, the pledges you made when you ran to be Labour
leader in 2019. Why should anyone trust these missions? These missions come out
of a discussion that we've had over the last two or three years across the
country about what we need to do. I'm so sorry, you just answered the question
by asking a new question. Forgive me. I'm so sorry. The question I asked was
about why people should trust you given you've abandoned so many of the pledges
that you made when you ran to be Labour leader in 2019. It's not about these
missions. We've talked a bit about that. You abandoned many of the pledges you
made when you ran for leader. So why should people trust you? Well, look, so far
as the pledges, when I ran for a leader, are concerned, they are important
statements of value and principle. And they haven't all been abandoned by any
stretch of the imagination. But what I've had to do is obviously adapt some of
them to the circumstances we find ourselves in. Since I ran for leader, we've
had COVID. Since I ran for leader, we've had the conflict in Ukraine. Since I
ran for leader, we've had a government that's done huge damage to our economy.
Everybody recognises that. What these missions are, and are the bringing
together of the fundamental problems we face as a country, some hard thinking
about how we have the long-term solutions to those problems. And not many people
disagree with these missions. What they want to know is, how are you going to
achieve it? How are you going to bring about real change in my life? Because
people are desperate for change. Go around the country. People desperately want
change. They know things could be better. They know we've got huge talent and
ambition in this country that is not being realised. There's that desperate
yearning for change. And what we're putting forward with the missions is a
programme to put that change into effect with a purpose-driven, mission-driven
Labour government. Can we just clarify a few points? You said that those pledges
were statements of value. It's not really what a pledge is. A pledge is a solemn
promise that's meant to be resilient to changes, right? So you made a bunch of
pledges. And I just want to go, these really are yes or no questions, because it
would be useful to know whether or not those pledges have, indeed, survived. You
were asked by the BBC in March 2020 if you could guarantee that under your
leadership, Labour commits or commitments to nationalise water, rail, energy and
the mail will be in the next Labour manifesto. And you said yes. Let me take
that head on. Last year, when energy prices were going through the roof, we had
to think what the response was, because people were really worried about their
bills for the autumn. And I asked my team to mock up different proposed answers
to that specific question in the reality of 2022. I said, include in your
analysis taking energy into public ownership. How much would it cost? What would
we get for it? And will it lower bills for this autumn? And so they did that for
me. And that showed that we would have to spend a lot of public money on public
ownership, that because the energy companies were still buying on the
international market, it wouldn't lower the price. And we wouldn't be able to
lower the bills for people into the autumn. And having done that analysis, I
took the political choice that it would be better to have an energy price freeze
paid for by a windfall tax on the oil and gas companies that made profits they
didn't expect to make. And we led the way in the early parts of August. The
government then followed in part during the course of the autumn. But having
worked it through, I had to answer the question, would I spend the money
available in compensation for shareholders last summer? And I think if I'd done
that and come on your programme, you'd have said, are you mad? Well, sure, but
maybe you shouldn't have made the pledge in the first place. The fact is, you
broke a pledge which you stood for with the Labour leadership party. Let's talk
about another pledge. You said in the same interview. You said now, you said in
the same interview. Pretending we're in the same economic position now. No, but
you shouldn't have made a pledge that you were prepared to break. That's the
point. You make pledges as promises that are meant to be resistant to, resilient
to, changes in the situation. What about tuition fees? This is the point of
principle. Are you telling me that you foresaw Covid? Are you telling me that
you foresaw conflict in Ukraine? Are you telling me you foresaw the kamikaze
mini budget of last year? Because you've got incredible foresight if you're
telling me that. I certainly wouldn't pretend to have any such foresight
whatsoever. But I'm talking about the nature of pledges. And these are points of
principle, about nationalisation of utilities. In the same interview, you were
asked, what about tuition fees? University tuition fees being scrapped will be
an Astarma manifesto. And you said the answer is yes. What's your answer today?
Well, I do think the tuition fee, the way we do tuition fees at the moment
doesn't work. And therefore, it's going to have to be changed. We need to look
at what the options are available. And we have to look at what's affordable in
the economy that we've got at the moment. Huge damage was done to our economy in
the autumn of last year with that kamikaze budget. And I think that many members
of the public looking at an incoming Labour government want to know and be
reassured, which they can be, that we would be a government of sound money that
would make sure that any commitments we made when it came to funding or costing
were fully, fully accounted in terms of what we're going to pay for, how we're
going to get it. It's perfectly reasonable to change your mind. The point is
there's a pattern here of a bunch of pledges made which no longer stand. Let's
talk about something else that you change your mind on, which is Jeremy Corbyn.
The independent inquiry that you commissioned by Martin Ford QC didn't really
teach us anything new about Jeremy Corbyn himself. It talks quite a lot about
the Labour Party and antisemitism. But Corbyn himself is, in many ways, the same
man elected to Parliament in 1983. For years, you worked for him. You supported
him. You campaigned across the country for him to lead this country. Yet you've
now suspended him from the Parliamentary Labour Party. He hasn't changed. So why
have you? Well, I think it's absolutely clear. The first thing I said as Labour
Party leader was that I would tear antisemitism out of our party by its roots,
that I would change our Labour Party. And I've done that. Our Labour Party now
is unrecognisable from 2019. Jeremy was suspended from the whip because of his
response to the Equality and Human Rights Commission. And I'll just remind you,
if I may, that that's the commission that found just over two years ago that the
Labour Party had acted unlawfully in breach of equality legislation. That is a
serious position for any party to find themselves in. Because of the changes
that I've brought about in the Labour Party, I'm pleased, but not congratulating
myself, that last week the commission took us out of special measures, said that
they were satisfied that we had done sustainable change in relation to
antisemitism in our party. That's not a moment for celebration. It's a moment
for reflection. But in order to get there, I've had to take tough decisions. And
I have taken tough decisions because I'm determined that we will change and
continue to change our party. I'm determined that we will tackle antisemitism
wherever it raises its poisonous face. And I will continue in the same vein. So
in relation to Jeremy Corbyn, the reason he won't stand as a Labour candidate in
the next election is because of the hard work that I've done in our party in
relation to antisemitism, having been found to be in breach of the law by the
commission, and having now got ourselves into a position where we have made
enough progress for the commission to say that they're satisfied we have a
sufficient plan and that we're not in special measures anymore. But, Zakir, if
he's not fit to represent Labour in Islington North, what does it say about you
and your judgment that you spent years advocating for him to be prime minister?
Well, look, every single member of the Labour Party campaigned for a Labour
government at the next election, just as every member of the Conservative Party
campaigned for a Conservative Party election victory. That's what happens at
every election. But I'm focused on the future. I reckon when in 2019, the
electorate gave their verdict, and my strong response to that was to say if the
electorate have rejected you that badly, you don't look at them and say, what
were you up to? Weren't you listening? You look at your party and say, we must
change. And that's why my first priority as incoming Labour leader was to change
our party. The second priority was to expose the government as not fit to
govern. And I think the evidence of that is becoming clearer every day. And the
third bit, which is what today is all about, is to then say, well, if not the
government, why you, an incoming Labour government? And today, we're continuing
to answer that question, which is because we will have these strong missions,
what we're going to achieve, and we will also set out how we're going to achieve
them, what a mission-driven government looks like. Can I just ask one other
question? Sadiq Khan has told us that he wants a policy of free school meals for
all primary school children. Do you? Well, look, we'll look at that. And Sadiq
Khan's obviously made his position absolutely clear. But I have to make sure
that everything that we put before the electorate at the next election, probably
next year, is fully costed. So of course, the fact that we're even having a
discussion about the hunger of children at school tells you something about the
state of the nation. But look, we'll look at that. We'll talk to Sadiq about how
his scheme is running. But nothing will be put forward at the next election
unless it's fully funded. Sir Keir Starmer, thank you very much indeed for
joining us. Thank you. It's 26 minutes past 8 now. How many refugees are you
taking? That was the question the German economy minister Niels Annen posed to
us just a few minutes ago. He was reflecting the frustration many here in
Germany feel when they're criticised for not doing enough to support the war in
Ukraine. This country has offered homes to almost a million refugees, and still
they come, with one leading politician declaring that the problem of housing
them is now greater than it was in 2016 when so many arrived here from Syria.
When the war began, I watched people pour off trains at Berlin's central train
station. Now, as I discovered yesterday, they come to the disused Tegel Airport.
This might look like any departure hall in any airport in the world with its
check-in desk, but the people checking in here are not flying on holiday.
They're checking in for a new life in Germany, and they are Ukrainian refugees.
The hope originally was that they would use this disused airport for a day or
two while they found their new lives. The sheer pressure of numbers coming to
this country, though, means many have to stay not just for a week or two, but a
month or two. I'm Sebastian. I've been working here in Tegel since March last
year. This originally would have been what, a departure hall for? It would have
been a waiting hall, yeah, actually. Now we're going into the hub. This is the
place where we send the people, basically, to the government authority that is
responsible for the distribution process. So there's a row of desks here, people
behind computers. This is the place where the processing begins. Exactly. And
we, Malteser, also do have an internet cafe here where we assist people with
opening a bank account, handling almost all government authority things the
people have to do. My name's Klaas, Klaas Morgenstern, and I'm working in the
managerial team here with the Maltese relief organisation in the arrival centre
Tegel Airport. How much pressure are you under here at Tegel, given the numbers
that are still coming into Germany a year after the invasion of Ukraine? So now
at the moment, we have numbers of around, what would you say, 100 people coming
here a day, 140. Yesterday, there were 140 people coming, 50 leaving. Yeah, so
less are leaving, then we have new arrivals that are coming here. Even now, a
year on, more people are coming than are leaving to find new homes. So we will
have to see where it goes. We don't know that. I mean, the anniversary is today,
tomorrow, in the next two days. So if there might be a new refugee movement
towards Western Europe, towards Germany. Even though you're not involved in
sending people to new homes around Germany, do you notice, is it getting harder
to do? Yes, it is. I know for a fact, I'm coming from Lower Saxony, that we are
at capacity over there. And also other states report that they are at capacity.
So they are trying to find new ways of allocating people within the system.
Xenia. Xenia and your little one? Sophia. And where are you from? From Odessa.
Just you and your daughter? No, I'm with two children. My daughter is almost
three years old. My son is 13 years old. This is one, two, and three our beds.
Three bunk beds. My son have make individual. Your son's on the top bunk bed
here. He's using a duvet in order to get a little bit of privacy when he
studies. And here you are, your family, three of you on three bunk beds. But
you're in a room with one, two, three, four, five, six, seven. Ten. Ten beds.
And what do they tell you? Do they tell you maybe one week, two weeks, two
months before you have a house? Nobody tell me when it be, but it's not bad. No,
they are working, they trying to help us. This is Claudia, our hairdresser. This
is important work that you do, Claudia. She wants to give the people something
back. And she wants to give them a moment to feel good, to look good, to have a
haircut. Because people are here and not having for months a beauty treatment.
So, yeah, it's a small container here, but it's a lot of heart within. My name
is Anna, and I'm from Ukraine. Whereabouts? Dnipro. You're here, you're warm,
you're comfortable, you're cared for. But back in home at Dnipro, it's not like
that. Yeah, it's hard, it's difficult for me. But my friends, they saw
everything. It was so sad. So quite a lot of your friends are still in Ukraine?
Yeah. When I was in Berlin in the immediate aftermath of the invasion of
Ukraine, watching people pour off the trains, no one would have believed there
would be so many still needing to live here in Germany. Here at this disused
airport, they get all the care they could want for, food and clothes, education
and entertainment. There is, of course, one thing they haven't got. It is what
they left behind in Ukraine, a safe home. It's an extraordinary sight at that
airport. If you want to get a little glimpse of it, I put a video up on our
Instagram feed. BBC Today programme is the hashtag at BBC Today programme on
Instagram. And we're posting videos there most days of some of our reporting. So
do take a look, please. 28 minutes to nine, and Gary's here with the sport. Hey,
Gary. Morning. 4.45 Saturday, Wales against England in the Six Nations. It's on.
There was a doubt because Welsh players had threatened to strike in a row over
contracts. Nigel Walker is acting chief executive at the Welsh Rugby Union.
Nigel, good morning to you. Good morning, Gary. In a nutshell, have you given
the players everything they wanted to stop them striking? Because it just wasn't
about international players. Have you given them everything they wanted? Not
everything they wanted. There's been a fair deal of compromise. There have been
some robust conversations over the last week or so. And with me, we've reached
an amicable resolution. Yeah, so compromise was the key thing. And 100%, that's
the end of the matter now. It is. And I've got the agreement of Captain Ken
Owens that they are now satisfied. We've got some things to deliver over the
next week or two. We being the PRB, the Professional Rugby Board, which governs
the professional game in Wales. And we're going to get to that straight away.
And there's absolutely no danger that in a few months they can come back and
say, well, the World Cup's coming up. You haven't delivered on this. So we could
strike for the World Cup and not play. I sincerely hope not, Gary. Ken and I had
another conversation yesterday evening. And now I am taking personal
responsibility for liaising with the squad as far as the Welsh Rugby Union is
concerned. And I will be meeting with Ken on a regular basis and two or three of
his senior players to make sure we don't arrive at the stage where we arrived at
a week ago, where there are demands placed on the table and the possibility of a
game being cancelled. Yes, key words there. You said you sincerely hope not. Are
you edgy or slightly nervous? Not at all. I think it's been an edifying
experience over the last week. Wales rugby fans, England rugby fans, Six Nations
rugby fans generally look forward to this fixture every year, every other year
in Wales. And the fact that it was in doubt brings no credit to us. And I'll
take responsibility for that and I'll ensure it doesn't happen again. Well, it's
good to hear that. Nigel, you've only been in the job three weeks, so nothing to
do with you. What's your understanding? Why wasn't this sorted out last year? It
seems longer than three weeks, to be perfectly honest, Gary. There have been a
few things which have come up over the last three or four weeks. There's no
point playing the blame game. I have not met with the players, was not aware of
their gripes. The main concern that they had was around professional contracts.
As you probably know, the Welsh Rugby Union, through the PRB, has been
negotiating with the four regions on a long-term framework, which would allow us
then to present players with contracts. That has gone on much, much longer than
it should have. There's been too much uncertainty for players and I understand
why they were edgy, why they felt they needed to take this action. We have now
told them that those contracts will be offered from the middle to tail end of
next week. And that's our obligation. If we don't deliver on that, if the four
regions don't deliver on that, well, we wouldn't have met our obligations, but
I'm sure we will. And we'll move on from this. Well, good to hear that. You
played international rugby for Wales. What frame of mind are the players are
going to be in? Are they going to really be ready to face England at the
weekend? Well, obviously I've been in contact with the players on a regular
basis over the last seven days. I've been in contact with Warren Gatland and his
coaching staff. They have prepared well. Warren is happy with the stage they're
at. What are we, 48 hours? Just over 48 hours before the game. Ken says they've
had a really good training week. We'll find out on Saturday afternoon. Nigel
Walker, thank you very much. Cheers, Nigel. 10 o'clock tonight, England's
cricket has played New Zealand in the second test. England have named an
unchanged side. Cracking match in Prospect at Old Trafford this evening.
Manchester United play Barcelona in the Europa League. The sides are level at
2-2. Five have commentary from eight. To recap, Manchester City and Leipzig drew
1-1 in the Champions League. Mahrez scored their goal. And England beat Belgium
6-1. Leah Williamson and Chloe Kelly scored two goals each. As we've been
reporting throughout the programme, full details of an independent regulator for
football will be released later today. And Andy Murray's through to the
quarterfinals of the Qatar Open. He beat Alexander Zverev. 7-6, 2-6, 7-5. You
want the tips before I go for the train. Here they are. Sedgefield, 3-15, number
three, first man. Huntingdon, 4 o'clock, number two, William Cody. My tip, Gary,
is that United are going to slaughter Barcelona. I shall be there at Old
Trafford. And I'm happy to offer you some impartial reporting on that topic
tomorrow, if you'd like. Yeah, I look forward to it. Cheers, Nick. Bye, Gary.
Now, Melvin Bragg can tell us about In Our Time in half an hour. Good morning.
We'll be talking about the mathematician Paul Erdos, 1913 to 1996. He's been
called one of the greatest problem solvers of all time. He was born into a
Jewish-Hungarian family. And by the age of three, he could multiply four-digit
numbers in his head. Forced to leave Hungary in the 1930s by the rise of
fascism, he spent much of his life leading an almost itinerant lifestyle,
ceaselessly visiting other mathematicians before settling in Israel. He was also
extraordinarily prolific, producing more papers on maths than anyone before or
since. That's Paul Erdos with Timothy Gowers, Colbarony Dougal, and Andrew
Troglone. On In Our Time on BBC Sounds and Radio 4 this morning, just after 9
o'clock. Now, back to today. Thank you very much indeed, Melvin. Quick look at
the weather, turning dry and bright for many today, but cloud and rain gradually
spreading into the north. You're listening to Today on Radio 4 with Amol Rajan
in the studio in London and me, Nick Robinson, in Berlin. And at 22 minutes to
9, Chris Aldridge has a summary of the news. Sakhir Starmer is launching what he
calls five national missions that will put centre stage of Labour's offer to
voters at the next general election. They include securing the highest economic
growth within the G7 group of nations, making Britain a clean energy superpower,
and building an NHS fit for the future. Sakhir told us people across the UK were
desperately yearning for change. Police in Northern Ireland say dissident
Republicans and the new IRA are the focus of an attempted murder investigation
after an off-duty police officer was shot multiple times in Oma, County Tyrone,
last night. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is in a critical but stable
condition in hospital. The government has confirmed plans to establish an
independent football regulator in what it describes as a radical transformation
of the way the sport is run in England. The new body will be tasked with
preventing clubs from financial collapse. The Home Office is to scrap face-to-
face interviews for about 12,000 asylum seekers in an attempt to cut a large
backlog of cases. People from Afghanistan, Yemen, Eritrea, Syria, and Libya who
applied before last July will now be asked to fill in a 10-page questionnaire.
Chris, thank you very much indeed. So there is then at 21 minutes to 9 an update
on that story about an off-duty police officer who was shot last night in Oma
and County Tyrone. It is Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell, as Chris says,
in a critical but stable condition. And speaking to Good Morning Ulster, Mark
McEwen, who is the Police Service of Northern Ireland's Assistant Chief
Constable, gave some more details about the attack. Last night at approximately
8 o'clock at the Youth Sports Centre in Killiecocker Road, Oma, whilst John was
putting footballs into the boot of his car and accompanied by his young son, two
gunmen approached and we believe both have fired multiple shots. John has ran a
short distance and he's fallen to the ground. And as he's on the ground, the
gunmen have continued to fire at him. That shows the absolute callous nature of
this attack in a crowded space where there are children and parents in the
vicinity. And we saw many of those young people and children running in sheer
terror to get to safety. Well, let's speak to Chris Page, our Ireland
correspondent. Chris, do we know anything else about who carried out this attack
and also the impact it must have on Oma, a town in shock? Yes, just at the scene
here, Ammall, on the outskirts of Oma, local people, local politicians, too,
have just been stopping to express how shocked they are. You heard the very
chilling picture painted there by Assistant Chief Constable Mark McEwen as he
described what happens at this sports complex last night when it was very busy
with children and young people doing sports training, playing football matches,
playing Gaelic football matches. Something else that the Assistant Chief
Constable had to say within the last half hour is that the focus of the police
investigation at this stage is the dissident Republican paramilitary
organization known as the new IRA. Now, the new IRA is thought to be the most
dangerous, the biggest, the most active of the dissident Republican nations who
are opposed to the peace process. They continue to target members of the
security forces. The attacks are rare these days. But as we have seen in the
last 24 hours, the threat in the UK still is very real. And Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell, the victim of the shooting, is quite well known here.
He's led investigations into both organized crime, drugs gangs, for example, and
indeed into dissident Republican paramilitarism. So for now, the police working
on the basis that they think the new IRA has been behind this attack. And
forensic work still going on. It's a condemnation still coming in from writers
across the political spectrum. Thank you very much indeed, Chris Page, our
Island correspondent. The line just dropped out a couple of times there, but I
think we got the gist of it. Thank you, Chris. 18 minutes to 9, a museum
dedicated to David Bowie. That's what the V&A are creating in East London. In a
couple of years' time, we'll be able to go to see his lyrics, his costumes, his
art, his life in London and here in Berlin, and of course, the music. ["In My
Head"] ["Heroes"] A song there from each of the three studio albums known as the
Berlin Trilogy that were recorded in Hansa Studios in the German capital. Well,
listening to that, Kate Bailey, the senior curator, theater and performance at
the V&A, who is masterminding this new museum, and Mary Finnegan, who knew David
Bowie well, was in fact his landlady back in the late 60s in Beckenham. She's a
writer and former journalist. Morning to you both. Good morning. Good morning.
Kate, I called it a museum. I am assuming it will be a little bit more than
objects behind glass cabinets. Yeah, Nick, we will be opening the David Bowie
Centre for the Study of Performing Arts as part of the V&A East Storehouse,
which is one of our new sites in the Olympic Park. So it will be the archive,
the David Bowie archive will be at the centre of this incredible study centre
and storehouse of treasures across our collection. And there'll be display areas
and opportunities for research. Now, of the things you've seen, what's really
caught your eye? What's fascinated you, Kate? Well, it's very interesting to
hear heroes and to think about you there at the moment. And the archive
obviously reflects David Bowie's whole career, his career, his life in art, his
life was art. But particular things that jump out are things that relate to the
creative process, those insights into David Bowie's ideas and imagination from
the creation of the Heroes album cover to the instrument that Brian Eno's
synthesiser that they created the album on. So it really gives this opportunity
to contextualise these incredible legacy and creations. And Mary, it's going to
be very odd for you, isn't it? There will be objects on display, a stylophone, I
hear, from Mark Bolan. Don't worry, in your flat that you remember having and
seeing with David Bowie. Yes, that's true. I mean, he was my lodger in 1969 when
he was about 22, 23 years old and he was absolutely flat broke. He had no gigs
and he was composing all the time, totally and completely dedicated to turning
out new music. And I offered him my spare bedroom. I had two children and I was
a single mum. And he accepted that as sort of nominal five pounds a week, which
never actually materialised. And when he first arrived, he carried a suitcase,
very small one, a 12 string guitar, which was given to him by Pete Townsend from
The Who, and this thing called a stylophone, which was a little long box. What
did he play on that? Do you remember? Well, he sat in my kitchen and said, would
you like to hear my latest song? So me and the kids said, yes, please. And he
sang Space Oddity and played the stylophone part of Space Oddity for us. And
that was the first time that we heard that song, which of course later went on
to be a great hit. Do the hairs on the back of your neck go up every time you
hear that song? What an extraordinary memory it is to have. I'm sorry, could you
repeat that? It's not a very good line. Do the hairs on the back of your neck go
up when you hear that song played as it is played so often these days? Yes, I
mean, it's the bit in the middle where the clapping happens, because I was
actually in the studio when it was recorded and we all clapped. And my hand
claps are somewhere on that recording. What is so fascinating about Bowie is the
diversity of his work, really, the art as well as the music. Where did that come
from, Mary, do you think? I think he went to art college for a while, not for
very long. But he was always drawing and scribbling and making notes and doing
little sort of small drawings, which I think a lot of that stuff's probably on
display in this show. And he also did the posters for the folk club that we ran
at the Three Tons pub in Vicanor High Street. He did those every week. And
they've got the increasing- If you find one of those posters, Kate, I imagine
you'd quite like to have one of those posters if Mary can find one. Absolutely.
I mean, it's great in the archive to be able to see these early, early moments
in Bowie's career where he was really kind of inventing the future already. But
to hear you speak is incredible. It did give me tingles on the back of my neck.
Yeah, well, I'm sure you can book Mary to do talks at the new David Bowie
Centre. Kate Bailey, Mary Finnegan, thanks so much for joining us. 12 minutes to
nine. With its themes of hope, friendship, and how courageous asking for help
can be, Charlie Max's The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse became a true
lockdown phenomenon. The NHS used his pictures. The Book of Illustrations became
the biggest-selling adult hardback of all time. And last Christmas, an animated
version was watched by more than 9 million people. Now that film has been
nominated in the Best Animated Short category at the Oscars. Meet it meaning
that Charlie Maxie is heading for Hollywood. 20 years after he last got on a
plane, our entertainment correspondent Colin Paterson has been to meet him at
his studio. Do you have a favourite saying? Yes. What is it? If at first you
don't succeed, have some cake. I see. Does it work? Every time. The Boy, the
Mole, the Fox, the Horse, and the Oscars. This is where the story all began.
Scribbling away, 15, 20,000 drawings in this house. Good grief. Oh yeah, in
boxes and boxes. Charlie Maxie's South London house comes studio, which he
shares with his dog Barney. Is there a filing system? Yeah. You know, when you
want to find something, you find something else, which is better. He started to
WhatsApp drawings to friends struggling with their mental health. What do you
want to be when you grow up? Kind. Then almost by mistake, built up a huge
following on Instagram, which led to a book deal. And thanks to word of mouth
during lockdown, it became the best selling adult hardback in Britain since
records began, beating Jamie Oliver. I didn't think it would sell very many. It
was just trying to make something that people could hold onto, you know, that
would give connection and make them feel less alone. I'm Oprah Winfrey. Welcome
to Live from the Library. His A-list celebrity fans include Oprah Winfrey, who
did an online lockdown reading and has her own special voice for the mole. I'm
so small, said the mole. Yes, said the boy, but you make a huge difference. Then
JJ Abrams, the man who rebooted Star Wars, helped turn the book into an
animation, one that is now up for an Oscar, meaning that Charlie Maxie has had
to board a plane for the first time in almost 20 years. I had a dog that had
severe separation anxiety. So if I ever went anywhere, I drove. So I never got
on a plane. Seriously? Yeah. Then she died. And then I got boarded. It was a
nightmare leaving him. He hasn't been around me for 14 years. Maybe it's me.
This is the thing. Everyone thinks it's the dog. It's me. I struggle to leave
animals that I love behind always. Imagine how we'd be if we were less afraid.
Of all the Oscar films, yours is probably the one seen by the most people in
Britain because 9 million people have watched it on the BBC since its debut on
Christmas Eve. Yeah, I didn't know that figure. That's quite overwhelming.
That's a left field wolf. I wasn't meaning to make you cry. No, no, it's fine. I
didn't know, you know, it's lovely to hear and I really hope they enjoyed it.
Really? Okay. Tears fall for a reason and they're your strength, not weakness.
And Charlie's buildup to the big night has begun. This is the Academy Awards
class of 2023. You've already been to the nominees luncheon. I have. Now just
tell people what that experience is like. All I'd say of it was it was disarming
because it was way warmer and friendlier and less competitive than I ever
jumped. You were about three rows behind Tom Cruise. Oh, he was lovely. And
Brendan Fraser, you know, I know he's had quite a journey and I saw him and I
just wanted to give him a hug. I said, you're amazing. Did you give him a hug?
Yeah, I did, yeah. You know, everyone there, you know, they've been through
stuff. Life is difficult, but you are loved. So finally, which of the four
characters do you think would enjoy the Oscars? I think the mole because he gets
fed and the fox would hide. The boy would be like, what? The horse would just be
very gently observing, but I think the mole would be right in there, getting
stuck in. Yeah, definitely the mole. Hello, cake. And on the 12th of March,
Charlie Macassay will find out if mole has his cake and eats it by taking home
an Oscar. Colin Paterson reporting and with apologies to Charlie. I should have
got his name correct. It's Macassay, Charlie Macassay. There we go. That was
about right, wasn't it, Nick? I think that's just about right. It's seven
minutes to nine now. All this week, whether in Tallinn or in Warsaw or here in
Berlin, we've been reflecting on the way in which the invasion of Ukraine has
changed lives all over Europe, not least in countries that were part of the
Soviet bloc until the wall that divided this city that scarred this continent
fell in 1989. Let's reflect a little bit more now with a man who's lived in,
written about, charted the life and politics of Europe, Timothy Garnash,
historian and professor of European studies at Oxford University, whose
brilliant new book, Homelands, A Personal History of Europe, is out next week.
Good morning to you, Timothy. Morning. How important is it for that idea that
has dominated your adult life, Europe? How important has the war in Ukraine been
for reshaping that idea? I've just come back from spending a week in Ukraine and
this year for Ukraine has been what 1940 was to Britain, the year that defines
ourselves in our fight for freedom, but also defines ourselves in the eyes of
others. So on the one hand, you have the suffering, the bomb shelters. It's the
first time I've given a university lecture in a bomb shelter. But on the other
hand, incredible courage, determination, and a determination above all to get
out from under the Russian bar, as they see it, finally decolonize themselves
from the Russian empire and join Europe and the West. That means concretely EU
and NATO. So I think this moment, Nick, is as big as 1945 or 1989. It's a moment
in which Europe could take another big step forwards towards a Europe whole and
free if we succeed in helping Ukraine to win the war and to become part of
Europe and the West, or it could be a moment in which the Russian empire
successfully strikes back. And that's why the choice that they're facing here in
Germany is so important. We've been reporting the last few years on the angsting
here. Angsting, you know well, you sat opposite Helmut Kohl, the first
chancellor of a united Germany. He talked to you about the challenges that
Germany would face after the wall fell, after this country was reunited. This
was one of the more remarkable conversations I've had in my life. This was just
after Helmut Kohl had succeeded in uniting Western East Germany in 1990. And as
you remember, Nick, Helmut Kohl was an absolute giant of a man, towering over me
in his office in the chancellery. And suddenly he said, by the way, you do
realize you're sitting opposite the direct successor to Adolf Hitler. A
conversation stopper if ever there was one. But the point he was trying to make
was, I'm aware of this historic responsibility. Hitler tried to put a German
roof over the whole of Europe. I want to put a European roof over the whole of
Germany. In the last 30 years, Germany has done pretty well in that respect. But
as you've seen with the hesitation of Olaf Scholz in supporting Ukraine, there's
now an even bigger challenge because unless Germany, which is Europe's central
power, really commits to this new project of what I'd call the new double
eastward enlargement of the West, it's not going to happen. And as you've seen
yourself. That is because in part time is on Vladimir Putin's side. He can be
very patient. There is no pressure of protests on his streets that he has to
worry about. Now you had lunch with him as well, I saw from the book. And he in
effect told you all those years ago of his ambition to take territory that he
considered still to be Russian. So this is another unforgettable conversation.
You know, Nick, life is lived forwards, but understood backwards. And looking
back over the last 50 years, one sees that one of the great drivers of European
history has been the decline of the Russian empire. We thought it was all over
when the Soviet Union fell apart at the end of 1991, but it wasn't. I met
Vladimir Putin in 1994, when he was a totally unknown sidekick of the mayor of
St. Petersburg. And at the end of the conversation, he suddenly piped up and
said, we have to remember that there are territories that have always, always
been Russian. And he specifically mentioned Crimea, which are now outside
Russia, and 25 million Russians outside the Russian Federation, and we have a
duty to protect them. So the imperialist revanchist instinct was there from the
very beginning. Sergei Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, is reported as
saying recently that Vladimir Putin has only three advisors, Ivan the Terrible,
Peter the Great, and Catherine the Great. Now, your book observes that
generations are shaped by events. You talk of the 1968-ers, you talk of the
1989-ers. That's you, I think it's me as well. Is there a danger though,
Timothy, that we're almost nostalgic for the moral certainties of the Cold War,
for the clarity of the Cold War, and try to impose on today's events the values
of then? You have to listen to the people who are actually fighting for their
freedom. It's not us telling the story of a new Cold War. It's them telling us
the story of the fight for freedom. In this book, Homelands, there's a lot of,
quote, unquote, ordinary people who are actually also pushing forward that
history. So I don't think it's us imposing that narrative on them. I think it's
a great chance, and quite specifically, what we have to do right now in the next
few weeks and months is get more weapons and ammunition to Ukraine, because on
the military developments of the next six months, I think that the future of the
continent will defend. Professor Timothy Garton Ash, we have to leave it there.
It's a fascinating book, not least because Timothy, known as such a passionate
advocate of Europe, describes how his father served in Germany as a soldier and
ended up a member of UKIP and a Brexiteer. Well worth a read. That's all from
us. Remember, tomorrow, Least You Set will be presenting this program.