TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station. This is the BBC. I'm
Alex Ritson with the Newsroom. Britain and the EU strike a deal to solve the
thorniest Brexit hangover. Today's agreement delivers smooth-flowing trade
within the whole of the United Kingdom, protects Northern Ireland's place in our
Union. We were both generally committed to find a practical solution for people
and for all communities in Northern Ireland. The apparent breakthrough is
welcomed by, among others, President Biden. The Governor of the US state of
Florida ends the historic self-governing status of Walt Disney World. The state
of Florida is the new sheriff in town. You've got to ensure that all these laws
are applied. Italy calls for EU action to stop migrant boats after the latest
shipwreck disaster. In football, Lionel Messi is named Men's Player of the Year.
And Michelin takes a star away from what was rated as the best restaurant in the
world. First, this news. This is Danielle Jauowiecka with the BBC News. Hello.
President Biden has welcomed a deal between Britain and the European Union over
post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. He called it an essential
step to preserve the Good Friday peace agreement. The deal will reduce customs
checks on goods from the British mainland destined for Northern Ireland. And the
Stormont break will enable the Regional Assembly to block new EU legislation in
the province if lawmakers agree. The Northern Ireland Minister, Steve Baker,
said he was pleased. I think it's a negotiating triumph and it's an act of great
statesmanship, for want of a better word, on the EU's part as well as Rishi's. I
mean, to have restored Northern Ireland's place in the Union in this way, on
trade and on a range of other matters like, for example, pets and parcels, a
huge triumph. And to have delivered the Stormont break as a real thing, I've
poured over the legal text myself, others will do likewise, but to have
delivered that, it's the most extraordinary negotiating triumph. Saudi activists
say that prosecutors have charged 10 senior judges with high treason, which
means they could face the death penalty. Sebastian Asher reports. The 10 judges
were arrested almost a year ago and have been held incommunicado since then. Six
of those detained were former judges at the Specialised Criminal Court, which
deals with cases of alleged terrorism and is where their case is now being
heard. The four others were members of Saudi Arabia's Supreme Court. The Dawn
Group says that one of them convicted the prominent women's rights activist
Lujain al-Hathloul, while another sentenced many of those put to death in a mass
execution last year. But Dawn quotes a source with knowledge of the trial saying
they signed confessions but they'd been too lenient. Serbia and Kosovo have
moved closer to normalising ties through a European Union-brokered peace
agreement but have fallen short of signing it. The EU's foreign policy chief
said their leaders agreed to endorse the plan. Meta Tsikrika reports. Serbia and
Kosovo are under pressure from the EU and the United States to normalise the
relations and resolve tensions that have threatened to ignite another war in
Europe. The EU's Josef Borrell said both Kosovo's Prime Minister, Albin Kurti,
and the Serbian President, Aleksandar Vucic, have shown a readiness to find
solutions. But he said more negotiations were required on how to implement the
peace plan. Under the deal, Belgrade would accept official documents issued in
Kosovo and agree not to block its membership of international bodies. Kosovo
will have to implement an earlier agreement to establish an association of Serb-
majority municipalities. Ukraine's President Zelensky has warned that the
situation around the embattled town of Bakhmut is becoming increasingly
difficult. He said the Russians were destroying everything that could be used as
fortification or defence. You're listening to the World News from the BBC. The
US Secretary of State, Antony Blinken, has arrived in Kazakhstan on the first
leg of a trip aimed at improving America's ties in Central Asia. He's due to
meet President Kassym-Jomar Tokayev and foreign ministers from the region.
Central Asian countries have long-standing ties with Russia but have avoided
offering direct support for Moscow's war. Many Russians escaping military
service have fled to Kazakhstan. Reports from Mexico say that the United States
has asked for the son of the jailed cartel leader Joaquin Guzman to be
extradited. Ovidio Guzman was arrested in January after a fierce gun battle near
the city of Culiacán. The resulting violence left dozens dead. He's accused of
drug trafficking and faces criminal charges in the United States. The Republican
governor of Florida, Ron DeSantis, has approved legislation taking control of
public services in the special tax district surrounding Walt Disney World's vast
theme park in the centre of the state. Signing the bill, he said, today the
corporate kingdom finally comes to an end. Here's Namia Iqbal. Since 1967, Walt
Disney World has used the self-governing Reedy Creek District to run its Florida
theme parks. It had unique control over development and other services within
its boundaries, something usually reserved for cities and counties. The creek is
now in Ron DeSantis' control, who announced there's a new sheriff in town. This
comes nearly a year after Disney spoke out against the governor's Florida bill,
which restricts certain classroom instructions about sexual orientation and
gender identity. The co-founder of one of Senegal's most famous bands, Touré
Kounda, has died in Paris at the age of 73. Ismaila Touré formed the group with
his brother in the 1970s. Much of their time was spent in France, where they
sang in six languages, blending southern Senegalese melodies with rock, reggae
and jazz. The group collaborated with other well-known musicians, including
Carlos Santana and Talking Heads. BBC News. Hello, this is the Newsroom with
Alex Ritson. How to treat Northern Ireland has been one of the biggest problems
posed by Brexit. The Good Friday Agreement 25 years ago, which brought peace
there, eliminated the hard border on the island of Ireland. But Brexit meant
there had to be a trade border somewhere between the European Union and Great
Britain. The Northern Ireland Protocol was an attempt to solve that problem by
placing the trade barrier between Great Britain and the island of Ireland. But
it was hated by unionists who want Northern Ireland to stay part of the UK, and
by their supporters in the governing Conservative Party. Now though, the UK and
EU have reached a new agreement, welcomed on Monday by the British Prime
Minister Rishi Sunak. Together we have changed the original protocol and are
today announcing the new Windsor Framework. Today's agreement delivers smooth-
flowing trade within the whole United Kingdom, protects Northern Ireland's place
in our union, and safeguards sovereignty for the people of Northern Ireland. The
Windsor Framework, named after the town outside London where it was signed, will
scrap cheques on goods destined only for Northern Ireland. But they will be kept
for goods heading for the Republic and beyond. The European Commission President
Ursula von der Leyen said that she and Mr Sunak had worked hard to reach a
breakthrough. We knew we had to work hard with clear minds and determination,
but we also both knew, dear Rishi, that we could do it because we were both
generally committed to find a practical solution for people and for all
communities in Northern Ireland. There's a lot at stake for all parties. The
unionists had pulled out of a power-sharing arrangement in Northern Ireland, and
that threatened a much-hoped-for trade deal with the US, which helped craft the
Good Friday Agreement, and doesn't want to see a return to the violence of the
past. The EU wants good relations with the UK, especially with the Ukraine war
going on, and Mr Sunak needs to get recalcitrant members of his own party to toe
the line. Our political correspondent Rob Watson gave us his assessment. Well, I
think they found a solution by both sides making concessions and essentially
saying, look, Brexit has left Northern Ireland with a dilemma, and we don't want
to have a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic, but
neither do we want a particularly hard border between Northern Ireland and the
rest of the UK and Great Britain. So it's certainly true that Northern Ireland
will still be treated different to the rest of the UK, and that is a problem for
some in Northern Ireland and for some Conservatives. But essentially what the UK
and the EU have decided is, let's do our level best through a mix of technical
measures and concessions to just sort of make this as smooth as humanly possible
in a difficult situation. Can they sell it to their respective parties, and in
particular, the unionists in Northern Ireland and for Rishi Sunak, the backbench
Conservatives who've been deeply sceptical of any deal with the EU? So first
off, I think the European Union will be fine selling it to its member states.
Onto the second problem is Rishi Sunak selling it to the rest of the members of
his governing Conservative Party. So far, I think it's landed rather well, and
he'll be rather pleased in that no senior Conservative has come out against it.
Maybe more problematic will be the dilemma facing the Democratic Unionist Party.
That's the biggest pro-union party in Northern Ireland, which essentially
withdrew from power sharing on the basis that it didn't like the protocol, it
didn't like the post-Brexit trade agreements because it made them feel less
British. So now I think the ball is very much in their court, and they do have a
genuine dilemma. There'll be plenty of their core supporters who say, no, no,
no, no, this whole new deal, even amended, it still treats Northern Ireland
different to the rest of the UK. So they'll be under pressure on the one hand to
reject it. On the other hand, there's a pressure pushing them in the other way,
and that is the sort of longer term thought of, well, if they reject this deal,
if they block a return to power sharing in Northern Ireland, won't people in
Northern Ireland and beyond start to say, well, Northern Ireland just looks like
a place that doesn't work. I mean, it's like a dysfunctional entity. So the DUP
has that delicate balancing act. But I think so far, Rishi Sunak will be pleased
at the way it's gone down in his own party. And I think that may reflect, Alex,
a certain sort of exhaustion over the issue of Brexit within the governing
Conservative Party, a sense that even if Conservative MPs, not all of them are
happy with every kind of item or detail of this deal, they just get a sense that
the British voters are entirely sick of the whole matter, and it may be best to
just bite their tongues. Briefly, last question, Rob. Does this mean that all
the Brexit problems, if this works, are over now? It means one of them
potentially is over, but I don't think so, in the sense that, yes, the UK and
the EU have talked about a new chapter. Yes, they want to reset. Yes, they want
better relations. But I think, you know, having a big country like Britain
outside of the EU, right next to this very large bloc, I think there are always
going to be issues that need resolving. It's going to be something that never
entirely goes away. Rob Watson. President Biden has welcomed the deal, saying in
a statement that it's an essential step in ensuring peace in Northern Ireland.
He expressed hope that power sharing would soon be back up and running. John
Kirby is the White House national security spokesman. We're grateful that the
two sides were able to come up with this agreement in keeping with the Northern
Ireland protocols. We believe that this will help improve the prosperity of both
the EU and the UK, and will open up all kinds of now avenues for trade that were
somewhat at risk. Let's speak to our North America correspondent, Peter Bowes.
Peter, why is Northern Ireland so important to the US and Joe Biden especially?
Well, Joe Biden often talks with a considerable amount of pride about his own
personal Irish roots. Defending the Good Friday Agreement is very close to his
heart. It's a big part of his political identity. His involvement politically
goes back to the 1980s, when he was a senator pushing for greater US diplomatic
involvement to end the conflict. And then he pushed the Clinton administration
to, again, commit more resources to help broker the Good Friday Agreement in
1998, which in his statement in the last few hours, he said he was deeply proud
of the role of the United States had played to help achieve, preserve and
strengthen the peace enshrined in the agreement. And that's a widely held view
here. There's long been a broad consensus between Republicans and Democrats on
the matter of the peace process in Northern Ireland. And in fact, when Rishi
Sunak held his first meeting with President Biden, this was last November in
Indonesia, he pledged that Britain would settle the dispute with the European
Union over Northern Ireland by April, the 25th anniversary of the Good Friday
Agreement. So news of the deal is very welcome news to Mr. Biden. So keeping the
peace is crucial for Washington, but will this now lead to the trade deal with
the US that Britain so desperately wants? That is a key question. In his
statement, Joe Biden applauded what he said would be the economic opportunities
that result from the agreement for the people and businesses of Northern
Ireland. He said the United States stood ready to support what he described as
vast economic potential for the region. But there was no mention of a trade deal
with Britain. But maybe the developments over the past few days will help move
things forward. And with that anniversary in April approaching, there is
speculation that President Biden could visit Belfast, Dublin and London to
market. That will be a hugely symbolic visit. And it may be an opportunity to
further talks on the issue of a trade deal between the US and Britain. Peter,
thank you. Peter Bowes. Our Europe editor Katja Adler, who is in Brussels, says
the Windsor framework has improved ties between the UK and the EU. Well, the
relationship has definitely already been affected. Look at that press
conference, the warm words. Dear Rishi, said the President of the European
Commission, both leaders talked about a new chapter in EU-UK relations. What a
contrast to those bilaterally bitter former Brexit negotiations. Now, of course,
the EU knows that Rishi Sunak is a Brexiteer, but they see him as an outward-
looking pragmatist. And working so closely together on Northern Ireland has done
a lot to repair years of broken trust. If we look at the bigger picture,
relations between the EU and UK have been normalising in the years since Russia
invaded Ukraine. The two sides have cooperated closely on Russia's sanctions and
on helping Kiev. And today, the Prime Minister and the European Commission
President were keen to say that with better relations come new opportunities,
working together on migration, for example, on a deal on financial services. But
what happens if the UK ultimately does not put this new Northern Ireland deal
into practice? Well, relations could sour pretty quickly if the UK government
goes back to a former threat to act unilaterally. A looming trade war with the
EU, still our biggest trade partner, could be back on the table in the blink of
an eye. Catch Adler on a rather noisy street in Brussels. Today, the corporate
kingdom finally comes to an end. The words of the Republican Governor of
Florida, Ron DeSantis, who signed a law which will give the state control of
public services in the special tax district surrounding Walt Disney World's vast
theme park. Mr DeSantis said that for far too long, Disney's special autonomy
had given it an unfair advantage over other theme parks. So Disney loses self-
governing status. The state of Florida is the new sheriff in town. We've created
a state control board that is going to be responsible for governing this area.
You've got to ensure that all these laws are applied. You've got to ensure the
debt is paid. And you've got to ensure the fair share of taxes are paid. Last
year, Disney criticised a bill in Florida banning school lessons on sexual
orientation, a move which angered Mr DeSantis. Our North America correspondent,
Nomia Iqbal, is following the story. Since 1967, Walt Disney World has used the
self-governing Reedy Creek district to basically run its Florida theme park. So
it's had unique control over development and other services within its
boundaries. If it wants to change infrastructure, it just does it itself. And
that's the kind of power that's really reserved for cities and counties. But
what happened was about a year ago, Disney spoke out against Rhonda Sanders's
Florida bill, which basically restricts certain classroom instruction about
sexual orientation and gender identity. It wasn't a law at the time, it is now,
but there was real anger about it, including amongst Disney staff. So the
company then released a statement vowing to help get the law struck down by the
courts, which hit a nerve with Rhonda Sanders. And so here we are now where he
has cemented the state's takeover of Disney's special Florida district. And now
he gets to create a board. He'll appoint people on the board to manage the
district and effectively Disney. In terms of the punishment, there's been real
criticism, not just by Democrats. There are also some Republicans who are
worried about what precedent it sets. They say if you punish businesses for
political speech, it's setting a terrible precedent. But you know, for Rhonda
Sanders, this is a big victory. We know that he is potentially going to run for
the Republican presidential nomination, and he wants to show that he's tough.
Yeah, you say he's widely thought to be likely to stand for president. Will this
go down well with his support base? I think it will. He's also on a book tour at
the moment, and his book, in it he warns the entertainment giant about its
political activity. So this book, he argues that the former Disney CEO
understood the risk that the company faced when it weighed in against his
efforts to restrict teaching about sexuality and gender ideology to Florida
students. And this was from kindergarten to third grade. And it'll be
interesting to see how well he does outside of Florida. So in Florida, and I've
spent a lot of time in Florida, he is really, really popular. How well this goes
down nationwide, we're still yet to see that. Nomi Iqbal, you're listening to
the BBC World Service. Our main news, President Biden has welcomed the UK-EU
agreement on Northern Ireland trade rules, saying it is essential for the
preservation of peace there. Fierce battles are continuing in eastern Ukraine as
the Russian invaders try to cut off the small city of Bakhmut. At the same time,
an early spring thaw has turned much of the front line to mud. That makes it
hard for troops and tanks to move around. However, in the air, Ukraine has been
using low-flying attack helicopters to hit Russian targets. Our correspondent in
eastern Ukraine, Oleg Erin, has been given access to one of the more secretive
parts of the Ukrainian defence force. A Ukrainian attack helicopter is just
coming into land now. Coming back after a mission to target Russian positions,
we haven't been told exactly where, but we know it was here in the Donetsk
region in eastern Ukraine. We're sitting now inside the helicopter with the
pilot Roman. The aircraft that you're flying, the helicopter, how old is it and
is it equipped with what you need to fight this kind of war? I think me and this
plane, we are like the same age. I am 34 years old. So it's a Soviet-time
produced helicopter. Of course, it's not enough for now for us to win this war
just using the Soviet-time equipment. So it's time to change it for something
new. Do you ever think about the fact that when you're asked, you're given a
mission, you're sent to fire weapons, do you think about the fact that there are
Russian soldiers who will be on the receiving end? There are no people on the
ground, only our troops and enemies. So if they came to our country with war, we
are just protecting our country. We are not aggressor, we are victim. If to win
this war, we should kill Russian soldiers, we are ready to kill them all. Well
the helicopters are now being refuelled and rearmed. This happens every time
they come back, as soon as they touch down, they're made ready for the next
mission because the order can come at any time. Paul Ogerin. Nigeria's two main
opposition parties have alleged fraud in Saturday's presidential election
following technical problems in the counting process. Myeni Jones reports from
Lagos. Polling station agents should have uploaded their results onto the
Electoral Commission's website straight after counting ended. But that didn't
happen. Voters reported issues with the voting machines and poor connectivity.
It took more than 24 hours for the first results to be announced, fuelling
speculation of foul play in a country with a history of vote buying and rigging.
Now the opposition says it has evidence the machines malfunctioned in several
states. The head of the Electoral Commission has denied this and stands by the
results. This is adding to an already fiercely contested election. Myeni Jones.
Let's get the sports news now with Richard Newman. And Richard, we have live
action. We do. We'll start with the cricket and go live to Wellington where the
second test between New Zealand and England is gearing up for a thrilling
finish. Stefan Schemmelt is there watching for us. Pretty heart stopping
conclusion this, Richard. England 231 for 8 chasing 258 for victory. Ben Foulkes
and Jack Leach, the men at the crease. Foulkes has 18, Leach to get off the
mark. England will look to be in control when Joe Root and Ben Stokes were
together in a partnership of 121. But Root for 95 and Stokes for 33. Both fell
to Neil Wagner's short ball ploy. Stuart Broad was caught at third man.
Remember, this would be England's first ever test defeat after enforcing the
follow on. New Zealand looking to level the series at 11. England 229 for 8.
They need another 29. Thanks Stefan. Tense stuff elsewhere. The best FIFA
football awards have been taking place in Paris and there have been some
familiar winners. Lionel Messi claiming the men's prize. The Spain and Barcelona
midfielder Alexia Peteles claims the women's equivalent. Yeah, on that Messi
thing, is it fair to say there was a distinct possibility Messi might not have
won another individual prize like this before he won the World Cup with
Argentina? Yeah, absolutely. He's 35 now. Performances for Paris Saint-Germain
have not been quite at the same level that they were at the Barcelona. But in
Qatar, he really did turn back the clock. He's won multiple Player of the Year
awards in different formats, usually competing with Cristiano Ronaldo. The
former Arsenal manager Arsene Wenger says they can't be compared. When they will
not be there anymore, we will realise what they have given us, both of them. I
always refuse to make a hierarchy in that because they are two different
players, completely different players, but two exceptional players who have
shown the world for 15 years how great football can be. Yeah, we have lived
through a special time. Any other notable winners, Richard? Yeah, England's
women's Euros team well represented. Beth Mead missed out on the Player of the
Year prize. Serena Bigman was named Coach of the Year, Mary Earp's Goalkeeper of
the Year. Richard Newman, thank you. Now. We have two preparations of oysters.
One that is crushed, seasoned with a little bit of herbs and olive oil. And
here, I would say it's a historical huitre sonnage glacé, or oysters in a frozen
pool, because I make a jelly with the water of the oysters, which makes it much
more comfortable to eat. That is the French restaurateur Guy Savoie proudly
detailing one of his mouth-watering meals. Food is a serious business in France,
especially when it comes to how restaurants are rated. Now, though, Mr Savoie
might be choking on one of his creations, as he has lost one of his three
Michelin stars. Terry Egan is following the story. Yes, Alex, this is likely to
be a big shock for Guy Savoie. His restaurant, the Monet de Paris, was last year
rated the best in the world. He's also held Michelin's coveted top three star
status since 2002. But his fame goes beyond the kitchen. He's an ambassador for
the French Art de Vive, pointedly rejecting, for example, the fad for non-
alcoholic drinks. And he even lent his voice to the French version of the Pixar
film Ratatouille. But none of that has prevented this downgrading. Yes,
Michelin's latest edition is published next Monday, and this time the restaurant
will have not three, but just two stars. Now, the reasons are never made public.
They're communicated only to the chefs involved. But the decisions are carefully
considered. And as the head of the guide pointed out, they're supported by
numerous visits from inspectors. Such verdicts are particularly sensitive, all
the more so after another chef, Bernard Loiseau, a close friend of Mr Savoie, in
fact, took his own life when he lost a star. Another chef, Marc Veyrat, once
took the guide to court when he was stripped of a star. He said he never wanted
to see a Michelin inspector in his restaurants again. How has Michelin
approached this? Well, the case of Guy Savoie is seen as particularly sensitive
and Michelin's boss contacted Mr Savoie to soften the blow before the news came
out. Because of the pandemic, no one's been downgraded since 2019. But he's not
alone. This year, one other restaurant was downgraded from three to two stars
and about 20 others went from two stars to one. So Mr Savoie won't be the only
one crying into his soup. Terry, thank you, Terry. Egan, finally. That's the
song Ema by Touré Kanda, the Senegalese band made up primarily of the brothers
Ismaila and Sexy Tundien Touré. Now, though, Ismaila has died at the age of 73.
The brothers, born in Senegal, completed their musical studies in Paris and
worked their way up through the music scene there. They toured Africa and in
1992 played for Nelson Mandela. Over the years, they played with Talking Heads
and toured with Carlos Santana. Touré Kanda are seen as one of the pioneers of
African music in France at the end of the 1970s, and they were representatives
of world music for everyone. Thanks for listening to a There was something about
the 18th century that does from this distance look like a kind of golden age
that didn't stick. The Invention of Russia, Wednesday at 9.30 and 20 GMT. Hi,
I'm Georgia Moody and come with me on the documentary as we explore the
seriously fun work of the Flying Seagulls. They bring the fun and joy of the
circus to vulnerable kids around the world. Kids in orphanages and refugee
camps. They believe that play is essential to all children, but especially those
in need. Join me after the news here on the BBC World Service. BBC News with
Danielle Jaworwiecka. President Biden has welcomed a deal between Britain and
the European Union over post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland.
He said it would help protect the peace secured by the Good Friday Agreement.
The largest unionist party in Northern Ireland has accepted that the deal marks
progress but says there are still issues of concern. Saudi activists say
prosecutors have charged 10 senior judges with high treason. They're apparently
accused of being too lenient in their judgments. Serbia and Kosovo have moved
closer to normalising ties. The EU says both will endorse a peace plan that
would see Serbia not blocking Kosovo's membership of international bodies. In
Ukraine, President Zelensky has warned of an increasingly difficult situation
around the besieged town of Bakhmut. Russian bombardments have reduced much of
it to rubble. As vote counting continues after Saturday's presidential election
in Nigeria, the governing party's candidate is leading, but the two main
opposition parties have alleged fraud. The Republican governor of Florida, Ron
DeSantis, has seized control of a special tax district that includes the Walt
Disney World theme park. Mr DeSantis said Disney's half-century of autonomy in
the self-ruled district gave it an unfair advantage over other parks. There have
been demonstrations in Israeli cities against a riot by Jewish settlers in the
occupied West Bank on Sunday. The protesters denounced the right-wing
government's backing for settlement expansion. The US Secretary of State Antony
Blinken has arrived in Kazakhstan on the first leg of a trip designed to improve
America's ties in Central Asia. Many countries there have long-standing ties
with Russia and either abstained or didn't vote on the UN resolution condemning
Moscow's invasion of Ukraine. Reports from Mexico say Washington has asked for
the son of the jailed cartel leader Joaquin Guzman to be extradited. Ovidio
Guzman was arrested in January after a fierce gun battle. BBC World News.