TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-13H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 music on radio 4 and BBC sounds starts next Tuesday morning at 11 30. BBC News
at midday. A rapist who changed gender while waiting to stand trial has been
jailed for eight years. Isla Bryson attacked two women in Clydebank and Glasgow,
one known as Adam Graham. There was controversy when Bryson was initially sent
to a women's prison after being convicted. The 31-year-old was then moved to a
men's jail. Passing sentence at the High Court in Edinburgh, the judge Lord
Scott told Bryson that there was no excuse for the crimes. You have constructed
an alternative account of events which was rejected by the jury. I will
therefore ignore it. You see yourself as the victim in this situation. You are
not. Rishi Sunak has said he looks forward to dialogue with the Democratic
Unionist Party as it considers whether to support revised post-Brexit trading
arrangements for Northern Ireland. The DUP wants time to study the agreement,
which could pave the way for the return of power-sharing at Stormont by giving
the devolved Assembly a veto on some EU law that might affect it. One of the
Prime Minister's predecessors, Boris Johnson, had tabled a law to unilaterally
override the existing arrangements and is yet to give his view on the new
proposals. Speaking from Belfast on the Today programme, Mr Sunak was asked if
he'd consulted Mr Johnson on the changes. Of course I speak to the former Prime
Minister, but this is not about any of us, this is not about personalities, it's
not about Westminster, this is about the people of Northern Ireland and what's
best for them. And this agreement means that the issues that have been raised,
the challenges that people felt, those can be and will be addressed. Police are
searching allotments next to a road in Bryson where a couple who went missing
with their newborn baby were arrested last night. Constance Martin and Mark
Gordon hadn't been seen since their car was found on fire on the M61 in Greater
Manchester at the start of January. The baby remains missing. Campaigners say
the issue of race is being sidelined in the ongoing public inquiry into the
Covid-19 pandemic. Dozens of organisations have written to its chairwoman, Lady
Hallett, expressing concern that structural racism won't be explicitly
considered during the investigation. Official figures found that ethnic
minorities were significantly more likely to die with the virus. Dr Halima Begum
from the race equality think tank the Runnymede Trust helped coordinate the
letter. Of the first 100 NHS staff members to die from Covid, over 60% were from
minority backgrounds and those victims ranged from socio-economic backgrounds
such as surgeons to cleaners. That gives you an idea of how pervasive the
disease was in our minority communities and for this reason the inquiry to not
focus sufficiently on such things as structural racism is a major concern for
us. The owners or managers of 12,500 high-rise blocks in England have been told
to register with a new safety regulator by October or risk prosecution. The
requirement has been introduced following the Grenfell Tower fire with a named
person becoming legally responsible for maintaining the safety of each building.
Rising milk, egg and margarine prices have contributed to a record increase in
the cost of food and drink. According to the retail analyst Kantar, grocery
prices jumped by 17% this month compared with the same four-week period a year
ago. The only survivor of three critically endangered Asiatic cheetah cubs born
in Iran last year has died from kidney failure. The animal had become a source
of national pride as Sebastian Usher explains. The birth of three Asiatic
cheetahs in a wildlife refuge in Iran last year raised hopes for preserving a
cherished species on the verge of extinction. It was the first time that cubs
had been born in captivity but their chances were slim as their mother did not
recognise them and they had to live separately from her and without her care.
Two of the cubs soon died but one named Pirooz, meaning victorious, survived. He
became a symbol not just of hope for the future of his species reduced to only a
handful in the wild but for the future of Iran itself. BBC News. This is BBC
Radio 4. We're looking at concerns around climate change later this afternoon.
On costing the earth at half past three, Kasa Alom looks at the tough decisions
that need to be taken about flood defences along the UK's coastline as sea
levels continue to rise. And then at four o'clock, the complex questions on
what's causing it. Fossil fuels at a time of energy insecurity. Should we expand
their use? We'll hear from a potential new oil field up in the Shetland Isles at
four o'clock on life on the edge of oil. And we stay with the subject of energy
now on Call You and Yours with Winifred Robinson. Thanks. Yes. Hello. Welcome to
the programme. We're talking about energy. We'd like to know how our energy
price rise is affecting you. You can give us a call right now, please. Ring
03700 100 444. Prices doubled this winter and they'll go up again in the spring
unless the government decides to put some more money in. We'll have some
practical advice and some predictions about when prices might come down. But we
really want to hear from you. So give us a call. Here's that number again. 03700
100 444. And we have some callers on the line right now. And first of all,
William, who is in the West Midlands. William. Hi. Can you hear me? Yeah. Hi.
Can you hear me? Yeah, that's lovely. Thank you. I can hear you. Tell me about
your situation, first of all. So I have four children. I rent my house and I
have a full time job working as an apprentice electrician. And so how are you
doing with your prices and your energy bills? How are you managing? Well, my
energy bill has gone up more than double. I used to pay 200 pounds a month and
I'm now paying more like 450. Yes, I think that is what's happened. They have
doubled, haven't they? Autumn to autumn, they doubled. Yeah, they definitely
have. Yeah. So how are you managing? Well, I'm having to work seven days a week
most of the time. And then when I finish my day job, I'm having to go out and do
extra work in the evening. Sometimes four hours. So I'm not spending any time
with my family. I don't get to see, you know, don't get to socialise very much
at all. And it's just very stressful. We haven't ever got any money. There's
never enough food in the house. Heating isn't very hot. Is the pay low as an
apprentice? I guess you're a kind of a late calling to that profession, are you?
If you've got four children? I started as an apprentice at the age of about 29.
It's not particularly good wage. I'm on universal credit. But the problem is, if
you do any extra work, and you register with universal credit, they take 65p of
a pound. Yeah, I see. And then your council tax benefits take most of the rest
and you end up no better off and you're doing extra hours and not seeing your
family, but still not able to pay your bills. What do you do when you do extra
hours? I do anything from gardening work to carrying on as an electrician. So
you must be desperate, are you, for the summer months to come? Or do you pay on
standing order? Will your bills stay the same? No, I let my bills build up until
I can find enough work to pay them. And then I just slog a load of hours out and
pay the bill. So hopefully the summer will be a little bit easier for you than
the winter has been, if you're paying as you go. Yeah, it would be a bit easier.
So you're doing these extra hours and you say that you never have any money.
Have you had to cut other things or have you not cut back and you've just worked
more? I think we have probably made a noticeable difference in the amount of
food we buy. We haven't cut back on things like the clubs our children go to,
because we see that as a more important developmental thing than the money we
spend on the school. But we do have a lot of money, and we're not cutting back
on that. Because we see that as a more important developmental thing than maybe
some of the social niceties we would be spending money on usually. Does your
wife work, William? I don't suppose she does with four children? My wife doesn't
work because we've still got a quite young baby at the moment. I'm sure she's
working hard at home. Yeah, she's just not working outside the home. She's
probably working harder than I am, I expect. So what do you see the future
holding for you and your family, William? I think we'll push through it and
we'll be okay. But there must be a lot of other people out there who haven't got
this extra work they can do on the weekends and the evenings. I don't really
know how people like that are managing. Thanks so, so much for getting in touch.
Well, good luck to you. Thank you. Thanks so much, William. How are the energy
price rises affecting you? Here's that number again, 03700100444. We've got
Nicola Clifford on the line in Mid Wales and Jenny in Leicester. Nicola, tell us
your story. What's happening with you? Hello, Nic. Hello, Winifred. Hi. Thank
you very much for inviting me on. You're very welcome. I've had a very slow burn
to my problem. So it all began in May when the energy supplier was switched to a
different one. And the first monthly bill was for £820 and more kilowatt hours
than I use in a year. So that was a mistake? That was a mistake. So obviously I
complained and a flock of meter readers visited. And unfortunately, the supplier
took no notice of the readings and every monthly bill after that was vastly
inflated. I'm now up to about £4000 of money that I don't owe. But at that
point, I began to fight back. Who's your supplier? OVO Energy. Okay. So you
started to fight back? So the main plot point that I could make noise is I
reported the issue to Ofgen, who upheld my complaint twice, in part because the
supplier lied in written evidence. Well, we went on. I won't go into that,
Nicola, only because obviously OVO are not here to answer. But anyway, go on,
you go on. I made a subject access request, which was ignored. So I reported
that matter to the Information Commissioner's Office and simultaneously filled
out a claim to the Small Claims Court. But the ICO and the court obviously have
huge backlogs. And then on Thursday, I received the debt collectors can apply
for a right of entry warrants letter. I already issued a cease and desist demand
on that day, verbally and in hard copy. And I'm really shocked because my
nearest shop is 10 miles away. I live on my own. I'm disabled and I'm very, very
challenged. And the supplier knows it. They even write in the letter, we know
that you're disabled. And if we fit a prepayment meter, it might be difficult
for you to reach, which I find beyond. And rather, you know, in all of this,
hours and hours and days and months, 10 and a half months, the thing that's
really made me angry is it's completely prevented me from working. In what way?
How? Just the stress of it? Yeah, it's filled my head. I'm a crime novelist.
I've got an editor to keep happy. And the days and days of fighting this, it's
got to the point now where OVO said they will only investigate my complaint
after they fitted a smart meter. Now, where I live, smart meters don't work
because the internet and mobile phones don't work. And to get a letter to
threaten me with a prepayment meter, which considering my circumstances is
illegal, Grant Shapps said it should stop only until the 31st of March,
obviously. But to be shocked to be given this, I'm now effectively a prisoner in
my own home because they cannot come when I'm not here. I've actually got a
little dog, he's a bit nervous and he wouldn't survive the dog catchers that
they send with them. So you're just stuck at home? Yeah, I'm horrified. I mean,
I'm mostly housebound anyway. And being a writer, I'm a bit of a hermit because
it only works if you're on your own. But you know, this threat hanging over me,
having to convince them that they're doing this illegally and trying to prevent
them from coming into my house. And of course, if I'm not here, they'll come in
anyway. You mentioned the dog catcher. We heard a woman, Elizabeth, on the
program yesterday, they do send a dog handler in case a person has a dog. They
do. The modus operandi seems to be between four and six, usually men, including
a dog catcher. And as I say, I'm getting on in years now. I'm not old, old, but
I'm very vulnerable. I'm disabled. And I've been fighting this with them from
May. If they'd investigated the first complaint properly, we wouldn't be here
because apart from anything else, I have solar panels. My mother died and left a
grand piano, which wouldn't fit in my house. So I sold it, put it on the roof.
Now, I've used 208 kilowatt hours since May. And OVO tell me that it's 14,000.
Wow. So they've got overcharging. They've been fined many times for this.
They're still doing it to me. And now I've even got my MP involved. And
unfortunately, OVO are telling the MP untruths. And with the best will in the
world, the MP's office doesn't see what I have in front of me. I've got three
inches of paper. And yeah, they've told me that if I have a smart meter, they
will investigate it. Well, that for me is either bullying, bribery or coercion.
There's no legal right for me to have a smart meter and where I live on the
mountain, they don't work. One person in my village has had a smart meter and to
get that to almost work, the energy company drilled two holes in their roof to
put up an aerial. Nicola, thanks so, so, so much for coming on and I wish you
the best of luck with it. It sounds like a horrible situation. Jenny, tell me
how you're coping with rising energy prices. Well, by not getting my heating
fixed, actually, because I live in a council flat, one bedroom. My partner died.
I'm on my own and vulnerable. And the council charge us by using a district
heating company or district heating network. Yes. I think it's heat and power.
Yeah. And it's really expensive whether you use it or you don't use it. But
we've got the rise that I yesterday saying that it actually says your rent from
the 3rd of April, your weekly rent will go up by 7 percent. But then lower down,
it says, sorry, if you have district heating in the property, which is payable
to the council as part of your rent, the charges for heating and hot water are
increasing by 108 percent or more. Gosh. So what does that? So you're saying
that you won't put your boiler on, but will that help you if they're charging
you anyway? Well, they can't. I mean, I cancelled my direct debit. So what tends
to happen is they keep sending me letters kind of like saying, you owe this much
rent, you owe this much rent. It'll get to like 300 odd or something and then
they'll either somehow manage to pay it or ask help from like a charity of the
company that I used to work for, you know, that is related trust type of thing
for companies. I used to be a news agent type of thing. And I think the council
get the energy off Kofi. I'm not quite sure. But then we had a meeting on
Friday. Someone put some posters up saying enough is enough, because on the
posters at that point last Saturday, we thought it was going up by 400 percent,
not 108. And they were voting on it on the Wednesday. And there was this meeting
and all the tenants were in panic. And because even people who are on like
benefits, that district heating and water isn't included. So even if you get
housing benefit, you've got to pay that part yourself nowhere, except maybe a
charity might help with it. I'm grateful for the government's help. But we have
electric too. I mean, I've got a prepayment meter. It's all a bit confusing. So
you're just not managing to make ends meet. You're not managing at the moment to
cover your energy bills. No, because it's the principle as well. There's lots of
demands on one's money and for food and health assistance and things. We have to
pay. I mean, I'm only one bedroom, but it's more for the larger flat. So it's
like at the moment it's £14 every single week of the year for the heating,
whether you're using it or not. But in 2011, I was written to by the council
asking, did I want to go on their pilot study and put a meter in and see what I
really use. So I did have it. I've still got the state of the art meter in my
cupboard, in the Arran cupboard. But they only let me, they only did it for the
year. And at the end of the year, I got two thirds of my money back. I
understand. So you think you're overpaying. Jenny, I'll leave it there with you.
But thanks so much. Thank you for getting in touch. Lisa Vitrip is in Cornwall.
Lisa, how are you coping with energy price rises? I'm quite terrified, to be
honest with you. Yeah, it's looking really scary. I don't know how I'm going to
cope. Tell me about your circumstances then. How much do you have coming in,
Lisa? Well, I'm disabled, quite severely disabled. So I'm surviving on benefits
at the moment. And are you managing to cover your bills? I know you say that
you're very worried about them, but are you managing to pay them? No, not at
all. I mean, I don't even know what I owe for gas because they made a mess
installing smart meters for me. So yeah, that's a bit of a worry. So do your
smart meters not work? No, what happened was a couple of years ago, or nearly
three years ago, they said they were going to install smart meters. And they
then said they installed prepayment meters. So I got a smart meter for my
electricity. But the gas meter was an old meter that they put on to prepay. And
they never supplied me with a working car to top up. So for nearly two years, I
had to wait till I ran out of gas at least once a month and had to phone up for
an engineer to come and put an emergency amount on. And every time they said
they would send me out a top up card, and it just never happened. So last year,
end of last year, the engineer that came out to top up finally reversed the old
gas meter to not be prepayment. But they've never actually arranged for bills or
anything. So I have no idea. First of all, I lived that long with constantly
having to worry about my gas running out. And the stress of it was horrendous.
And now I still have a lot of stress because I don't know what my gas bill
actually is and what's going to happen. Lisa, thanks so much for getting in
touch and sharing that with us. How are energy price rises affecting you? To
come on the programme, ring 03700 100 444. If you'd rather send us a message,
you can email you and yours at bbc.co.uk. You can text us to 84844. You can
tweet us hashtag you and yours. And David Ellis's email to say I own a self
service laundrette and our major direct costs are gas, water and electricity. We
use gas to heat the water and the dryers electricity for running the machines
from April, our gas costs will be almost 700% higher than they used to be. And
electricity will be 350% higher. We've got no option but to pass these costs on
to our customers. And this one from Helen Stiles. I'm 64 years old. I'm single.
I've worked all my life. I've got no private pension. But because of the rise in
energy costs, I have nothing left over to save for my future. I find that I am
dreading my retirement. The war in Ukraine has caused these price rises, they
soared on wholesale markets. It's those prices on the wholesale markets that
have been now passed on to us at home. Six out of 10 people said they were using
less gas and electricity because of the rising cost of living. That figure was
in a latest official survey from the Office for National Statistics. Another
survey for the Financial Conduct Authority found that UK households on average
do have some more savings to draw on now because money that was put away in the
pandemic has not been spent. And around one in 10 people came out of that same
survey taken at the end of last winter and said they were in financial
difficulty. So before this winter, before bills went up again, one in 10 were
already in financial difficulty behind with household bills or other debts. Anna
Stevenson is from the charity Turn To Us. Anna, you know, we started off the
programme with some people there who just really cannot afford the bills that
are coming in. What happens then if you cannot pay your energy bills? If you're
falling behind on your energy bills, the most important thing to do, and I know
that this isn't really what people want to do when that happens, but the most
important thing to do is to keep talking to your supplier, because they need to
have that assurance that you know that there's a debt and that you're trying to
do something about it. There is debt help available. A lot of people, studies
have shown that people on average wait about a year too long to get debt help,
and that's a hell of a long time to have that stress hanging over your head. So
if you're in debt, if you've got bills you can't pay, get some help with your
debt now. Don't leave it for a year of poor sleep and stress and anxiety.
There's lots of debt charities in the UK that can help you come up with
solutions that are going to be appropriate to you and to your circumstances.
People like Step Change or Christians Against Poverty will be able to go through
all your incomings, all your outgoings and look at what the best option is going
to be for you. How long would you have to wait to get debt help? You don't need
to wait until things get bad. Are the debt help agencies able to cope with
demand? So they are very, very busy, but it's still better to approach them
earlier rather than wait until things are at crisis point and you're trying to
contact them when you know that there's bailiffs coming in a couple of days
time. It's better to contact them before. Did they have more success with energy
companies than our listeners have? I mean, the regulator Ofgem said that
customer satisfaction with energy companies is among the lowest levels it's been
since they started looking into it, you know, for years, lowest level it's been
for years. And if you think of our first few callers, you know, Lisa has meters
that don't work, can't get any joy. Nicola, you know, is going to have a
prepayment meter for forcibly fitted. She says that the energy readings are
wrong. Yeah, I mean, Nicola's situation is very particular in that, yeah, there
is absolutely no way under the current rules or under the rules that applied
before the crisis pause was put in that any prepayment meter should be being
fitted in Nicola's property. So things are going very badly wrong there. But
yeah, people who work with energy debt professionally, they know all the routes
through the system, they can have that confidence when they're being misinformed
or when something is going very wrong to say, this is going very wrong, this is
what you ought to be doing, just get it done. Nicola should not be switched onto
a prepayment meter without her consent, because she says she's she's not going
to be able to pay for it. Because she says she's she's severely disabled. Who
else shouldn't be able to be switched to a prepayment meter, even if they're in
debt? Right, right now, nobody. There has been a pause put on all forced
switches to prepayment meters up until the end of March this year. So right now,
no one should be being switched. Ofgem are reviewing some of the rules around
who can and can't be switched. So we may see something different come out in the
rules after the end of March, up until this pause was put in place. You
shouldn't be switched if you were disputing a bill as Nicola was, you shouldn't
be switched if you're disabled and you would have severe difficulty accessing
prepayment meter or severe difficulty topping it up. So there's no way that
Nicola should be on a prepayment meter at all. Right now, no one should be being
put onto one against their will. There's something called the priority service
register. Is it worth getting onto that? It can be yes, the priority service
register is a register that energy companies keep to keep track of who may be at
particular risk of their energies cut off. The aim of it mostly is to protect
people who are at risk from power cuts. So if you've got young children at home,
if you've got medical equipment at home, if you're over pension age, but it also
covers things like people who may need a bit of extra support communicating well
with their energy supplier. And it also just means that you've got that little
tag on your energy support that shows anyone opening up that account that this
is someone who needs a bit of extra support that maybe they should think again
before trying to force fit a prepayment meter, for example. What benefits are
available to people, Anna, that they might not be claiming? Benefits in the UK
are quite badly underclaimed. So pension credit, which is the means tested
benefit for pension age people is underclaimed. It's likely that council tax
support and universal credit are also both underclaimed. And the important thing
about these benefits when we're talking about energy bills is that these give
you access to extra energy help, which is called the warm home discount scheme.
It works a little differently in different areas of the UK, but it gives £150
off energy bills over the winter for households that are at risk of fuel
poverty. Our question today, how are energy prices affecting you? Here's the
number 03700 100444. Anna, let me just bring a pensioner into the discussion
because you mentioned that pension tax credits are not being claimed. Sharmi
McCutcheon is in Cumbria. Sharmi, I know that you are worried about your bills
and that you're spending a quarter of your pension on energy. Tell me, are you
claiming any of these benefits that Anna has just mentioned? No, I'm not
eligible. I've got because of the value of my house. I can't claim. So, tell us,
go on. That's wrong. Okay, Anna. So, just to be really clear, the value of your
house is never counted. So, you do not count the value of your house when you're
working out if you're entitled to benefits. So, that's completely ignored. I'll
revisit that then. I've misunderstood it. So, please check if you're entitled to
pension credit. I think it's likely you could be missing out on quite a bit of
money you're entitled to. You can do it really easily for free. It takes about
10 minutes. Just go on our website, turntowells.org.uk or get someone you trust
to do it for you. You can run through a few questions and we'll tell you what
benefits you're entitled to. Sharmi, tell me about your circumstances now. Don't
go. Just tell me how you're managing with the rising cost of energy. I'm not
managing very well. As I said in my email, I'm spending about a quarter of my
pension, my state pension, on my energy bills. I've had to cut down considerably
on going out, buying food. I'm very careful. I used to go shopping twice a week.
I now only go shopping once a week. You know, I sort of do very reasonably
priced meals. I cook everything from scratch, always have done. I don't go out
as much as I do. I have a friend that keeps asking me out for lunch and I just
say, no, I can't afford it because of the price of going out has gone up
considerably. You know, you're talking about 20 to 25 pounds for a lunch out and
that's, I don't drink. I just can't justify that. Sharmi, are you living just on
the basic? I'm getting married next month and I can't afford to travel as much
as I used to because I used to save out of my money and now I can't. What I have
done is I've stopped my direct debit because in fact I'm paying less even in the
winter than what I was paying on my direct debit because they were
overestimating the amount of energy that I was using. I think a lot of other
callers have said that I had money sitting there but it wasn't being used
towards the energy. So I now pay as I go along. But I got about, I was about £10
in debt and I got a very nasty text saying they'd been trying to contact me to
pay money that I owed because in fact I'd never had the bill and I'd never had
any contact. So they're using quite aggressive methods to make sure that you
don't go into debt at all. Sharmi, can I ask you, are you living just on the
basic state pension then or do you have private pensions as well? I do have a
slight private pension but my base, my ongoing cost to my state pension, so
everything comes out of that. Most things come out of that. I think my council
tax is covered by my private pension. So Anna, do you think that Sharmi, even
though she does have a small private pension, might still qualify for some of
these benefits that you mentioned as being unclaimed? Yeah, it's very likely.
It's hard to say for sure without going through all the details, but it's very,
very likely that Sharmi might be missing out on money that she's entitled to.
And that belief that she had that the capital in her house would stop her
claiming benefits, that's a really common misconception. So that's why I push
back against it so hard. I just want people to really know that the capital in
your house doesn't count. Sharmi, thanks. I thought it was assets of more than
£16,000 and a house is an asset. No, I think it's assets but not counting your
house. Is that right? That's right. Yeah. Okay, then I'll have a look into it.
Okay, Sharmi, best of luck with it. Thank you so much for that. You're listening
to Call You In Yours. Here's our question today. How are energy price rises
affecting you? Here's the number 03700 100444. We've got Mark Hinchcliffe in
Harrochate and Daisy Fawcett in Redcar. Mark, tell us how you're coping. Hello.
Hi, Mark. Hi. Tell us how you're coping. Well, it's almost impossible. I have a
biomass boiler and I use pellets which are like a cattle pellet, which is like a
wooden compound made into a little pellet. If you look at a year ago, the pellet
was costing for a five ton delivery £1370 and literally my delivery, which I had
before Christmas was £3,500. Gosh. Yeah. How can you find that extra money with
difficulty, I suppose? Well, it's absolutely ridiculous. I mean, in some sort of
way, I'm lucky because I run a bed and breakfast where I live and it's a large
place. But I mean, you've got to look at the Ukraine, mainly pellet apparently
comes from Ukraine, Russia and Belarus. And now because we've left the EU and
all the other problems we've got, we're now having to buy the pellet from
America or Spain or somewhere. So you've got these huge increases. And much like
everybody's been on the phone today, everybody else is still paying these
incredible amounts of money. But all the energy companies are still all making
incredible amounts of profit, which I find unbelievable. Daisy, what's your
situation? Well, I've got a small pottery workshop and gallery in Redcar and my
bills have gone from 200 a month to about 1000 a month. In some months, I don't
even make that. Gosh. So I'm just working for nothing. Luckily, I work for a
company called Pure Table Top and I design prototypes which subsidizes the
gallery. And I've come back to an area that's quite deprived to give something
back and opened up this and I do have a sense of place that celebrate the area.
And the business has grown year on year. And yet now, what's the point of
working for nothing? It's just unviable. And I left the area in the 80s to do a
degree. I had a grant. It took me away. I became a senior lecturer at
university, came back to put something in and now it's all been taken away from
me. What are you going to do, Daisy? Sorry. I don't know. I've paid my rent
until April and the landlord offered to reduce my rent. My freelance company are
giving me extra but I don't see why they should be paying for the electricity.
And these companies are making huge profit and nobody seems to be holding them
to account. Nobody, the local MPs don't seem to be fighting our corner. I just
don't understand how it's been allowed to happen. They say, Daisy, don't they,
that lots of pension funds and so on invest in them. So when we say that their
shareholders are being given big dividends, it's a lot of pension funds. Yeah, I
mean, that doesn't help my situation, does it? I mean, you know, it's another
empty shop on the high street where they're trying to bring in, levelling up
funds and making a difference, helping it to become a tourist destination. And
yet it's, you know, it's just not helping at all. Mark, is there anything you'd
like to say to Daisy? I have total sympathy. It's absolutely disgusting with
these energy companies. And like they say, there's so many shares and money
involved in oil. That's where it all comes down to. It's horrible. That's why
the government doesn't want to do much about it. Everything's about oil and
money and capitalism, sadly. Much like the train system in this country, nothing
runs well. I mean, why aren't they doing anything to help businesses? Why is it
not really being shouted about? You do get some discount, don't you, Daisy, from
your energy supply. I mean, there is a scheme. I know it's not as generous.
There is a scheme and it does say that on my bill that I'm getting help, but
it's actually not helping at all. It doesn't help. It's, you know, the unit
costs have gone from 14 pence to 66 pence and an increase on the daily tariff.
The 66 pence will in itself be a cap though, Daisy, won't it? You know, the
government will be contributing. It is contributing. Yeah, but how horrendous
that it's gone from 14 to 66 and that includes the cap, which doesn't help me at
all. I mean, it's just not visible. And if that cap goes, then I'm definitely
finished, you know, and that's 37 years of investment into this area of
expertise. And lots of other pottery, that clothing that I know of. Sorry, yes,
go on. I think you were going to say something about the company that you work
for, weren't you? Well, the company I work for are really helping me, but I'm
just angry that they haven't helped me. You know, they've got their own
difficulties. So as my landlord, you know, I'm on a peppercorn rent as it is.
People say, oh, why don't you move? Why don't you this? But I take that
electricity. I need electricity. You know, my work is fired two or three times
for 12 hours. You know, I can't just, you know, people ring up to help me and
they say, why don't you turn the electricity down? You know, you can't fire a
pot. You can't take a bag of clay and make it into anything without the use of a
kiln. And I got a kiln with a grant with the money that was given to me during
lockdown. We had, every time I opened my bank account, I had more money in
there. They couldn't throw enough money. And now it's just rendered useless
because I can't use the kiln. Daisy, Mark, thanks both very much. You're
listening to Call You and Yours. It's 22 minutes to one now. I'm Winifred
Robinson. We're talking about energy prices today, how our energy price rise is
affecting you. Give us a call 03700 100 444. In April, the typical annual
household bill will rise from £2,100 to £3,000. It's because government help
known as the energy price guarantee will become less generous and a £400 winter
discount on all bills will end. The government currently compensates the energy
supplies with the difference between this price guarantee and the price that is
set by the regulator Ofgem. It's complicated, I know. Joe Malinowski from the
Energy Shop, a price comparison site, has been analysing wholesale energy
prices, looking at what might happen next. The only way this could change, Joe,
and we could pay a bit less in the next quarter would be if the government
announced in the budget in March that it was going to put a bit more money in,
but that doesn't seem to be likely. So let's go on to the next three months when
there'll be a new price cap from the regulator. What do you think we're likely
to be paying in the summer? Hi, Winifred. Thanks very much for having me. You're
welcome. Well, actually, there's a couple of things. I'm going to throw – I know
there's been some heart-wrenching stories out there, but I'm going to throw a
bit of what I hope is positive news, which is that we are very much over the
worst of it. And prices may not yet have caught up because retail prices are
still on an upward trajectory, whereas wholesale prices, which is ultimately the
underlying cost of the gas and electricity that we use, have been collapsing. I
mean, they've been falling for five to six months straight now. And when I say
collapsing, I mean they're down 80% from their peaks. Now, they're nowhere near
where they were two years ago because, of course, they shot up by a factor of
10. So they would need to get down to 90%. I don't think that's going to happen.
We are definitely past the worst of it. And it's just a question now of catching
up. So as you mentioned, what's happening with the energy price cap, as was
announced yesterday, is going down by £1,000. That's somewhat academic because
the energy price cap is capped by another cap called the energy price guarantee.
And if the energy guarantee is lower than the price cap, we pay the energy price
guarantee rates. And if the cap drops below the guarantee, then we move back
onto the cap rates, unless we get a competitive market, in which case the
competitive prices are cheaper, we haven't got them yet, then we move on to
competitive prices. So there's a couple of things at play here. Firstly, as you
so rightly mentioned, the energy price cap is going down, but by nowhere near
enough yet to make a difference. So that's academic. What it does do, it
calculates the cost that government pays back to energy companies to subsidize
the guarantee rates. The guarantee is going up from a notion of £2,500 up to
£3,000 from 1st of April. But it depends how much you used, doesn't it? Sorry,
Joe. Absolutely. People grasp that and think, oh, no one will ask me to pay more
than £3,000. But in fact, that's just an average figure, depends how much you
use. It absolutely depends on use. And it's a useful reference point to give
people an overview of the direction of travel. So it's kind of at a notional
level, whereas actually the average bill is actually probably almost lower than
that. Because one thing we've seen from your callers, we've seen from the stats
now is the high prices have led to people really thinking about how they use the
energy and they have cut back quite substantially and that's positive news. But
the other thing that's going on here is that there's been a call that's going to
throw a lot more people into poverty. Yes, your energy unit rates are going to
go up because the guarantee is going to go up. So you will pay on average 20%
more for each unit you use. But the difference between the first quarter and the
second quarter is that in the first quarter is the biggest quarter for gas usage
and half of our gas usage is on space heating. So we use typically around about
42% of all the gas in the year in the first quarter, that drops to 17%. Yeah,
it's a massive 60% reduction in gas usage. For anyone who pays as they go. So
for anyone who is paying their bills, like our first caller, William, just as
they come in, or anyone on a prepayment meter, their costs will come down
because we're going into the summer. Yes, energy bill, it is factually incorrect
as we're seeing actually a lot of calls at the moment saying people's bills are
going to go up in the second quarter, unit prices will go up, energy bills will
not, your energy bills, this is the good news, they will come down. If you're on
a prepay meter, you will see that immediately because you will be paying,
feeding, you're getting more, you're getting longer usage for each time, largely
because you're not using it because you're going to be economizing on energy.
But actually, it doesn't just affect prepayment meters. I think this will
cascade its way through the system totally because if you're paying quarterly or
you're paying monthly direct debit based on what you use, you will see those
bills go down even though each unit price is higher. And also on direct debit
customers, because energy companies are supposed to factor in the fact that, so
what's expected to happen to energy prices going forwards. Now, it is a matter
of time before the collapse that we've seen in wholesale prices feeds through
into the cap and then into your bills. We are seeing a lagged effect of that
now. The cap has gone down to from over 4,200 to just over 4,000 to around
3,300. Next quarter is expected to drop to just over 2,000 and stay at that
level. So, we are just going through the peak of that bills catching up. And
companies, if they are doing the right thing in budgeting, they should be
allowing for the fact that the guarantee rates go up in April, but then collapse
in July and stay low. And therefore, your direct debits, there should be no
reason why direct debit should be going up at all. In fact, they could be
getting cut from the 1st of April, allowing for the expectation now that bills
are going to be falling quite substantially under the price cap come July and
then come October again. Joe, our last two callers, Mark and Daisy, they
reflect, I think it's fair to say, a general anger with energy companies. But
the retail sector, so not the energy generators, but the retail sector, so the
companies that sell us energy, they've been loss-making overall since the price
cap came into force. Just in the last couple of weeks, we've had Scottish Power,
EDF, both showing that their supply businesses are losing money. And 30
suppliers went out of business in the autumn of 2021 because they couldn't cover
their costs. So, who is it who's raking it in at the moment? It isn't the
people, it isn't the arm of the business that supplies us domestically, is it?
Although the businesses often have a generating arm too, don't they? Yeah,
you're absolutely right. Historically, the retail business has not been a great
business. It's run by a few mavericks, reckless companies who were driving
prices down. Other companies were forcing to compete with them. The ones that
went bust, some of the ones that went bust. Yeah. A lot of the ones that went
bust were sort of selling – But the big ones left standing, Joe? The big ones
left standing have not been making money up to date. But I think that could be
about to change because we've had a big shift in the – well, firstly, to answer
the question who's making it, it is the upstream producers. It is the producers
of upstream gas and electricity like BP, like Shell, like Saudi Aramco, like
Gazprom, for example, in Russia. They have been making out like bandits as a
function of the fact that they are exploring, they have fixed exploration costs
and they are a price taker in the markets and global prices have gone through
the roof because of a tightness of supply associated with the bounce back and
issue from COVID. And then, of course, Russia's invasion of Ukraine and the war
in Ukraine has driven those prices up. So, they have been making out. The retail
business, however, I think is about to turn a lot more positive for a lot of
companies and there may be a case for looking at that profitability because if
you've seen the regulator, initially, their focus was on driving prices down for
consumers by promoting competition. Now, they have realized that quite possibly
or certainly the way they did it by letting anybody into the market, reckless
companies as well, was a mistake. A lot of those guys went bust because they
weren't running their businesses effectively. And now, it's pivoted to try and
salvage what's left of the market. In fact, almost underpinning and guaranteeing
the survival of companies and the profits of companies. And in a price where the
price cap is extremely high, but wholesale prices have collapsed, in a
competitive market, we'd be seeing some £2,000 bills already. Then I suspect
that some of these retail companies right now are doing very, very well indeed.
Okay. Well, we'll see, won't we, when the next lot of results come out. Jo
Malinowski from the Energy Shop. Thank you. How are energy price rises affecting
you? Call us 03700 100444. We've got Sally Lester on the line in Stratford-on-
Avon. Hi, Sally. How are price rises affecting you? Tell us about your
circumstances. Hi. Hi. Well, three years ago, I was a university lecturer and I
unfortunately got COVID and I haven't been able to work since. I'm sorry. So,
I'll try my best to make sense today. But I live in an apartment in Stratford-
on-Avon and I've realised that the only thing that I'm going to be able to do
really is I decided a couple of months ago that I would rather be made bankrupt
so that I could eat and be warm than pay my utility bills. So, you've just not
paid anything? I haven't paid anything for months. There are two reasons for
that really. One is financial and the other is that I live in an Orbit housing
property. And right from the beginning of the Orbit tenancy, which I took on
three years ago in a brand new building, unfortunately, Orbit, and I can say
this quite categorically, have been in breach of tenancy agreements with a
significant number of their tenants. Sally, I have to challenge that because
Orbit are not here. So, let's not go into that. That might get us into legal
trouble. But you're not paying for your energy bills? No, I'm not. No, because
I've got long COVID. As I said, I can't work anymore. So, I also have developed
loads of allergies from long COVID. So, my expenses are significant now. I have
to have gluten-free food. I've got to take loads of supplements every month. And
I've spent almost all of my savings now. So, I've got very little left. But I
think the most important thing really about this is that we've got that very
famous saying, is it Marilyn Tranet, let them eat cake. And I do very much feel
that there's a real disparity in society about the haves and the have nots. I
don't think that governments are treating the vulnerable members of society very
well. Let's bring Anna Stevenson in from Turn to Us. Anna, listening to Sally,
what thoughts come to your mind? I mean, I was thinking very much what Sally was
saying that very few of us have enough money saved up for that bad luck of
happening to become long-term ill or long-term disabled as Sally has. And the
disability benefits that we have in place are not enough to meet a decent
standard of living by a very significant degree. And that's been the case for a
long time, but it's getting worse and worse and worse. OK, Sally, I'll let you
go because we've always got to... Can I just say one more thing? OK. That I've
been trying to be pragmatic and look at alternatives and getting some sort of
little sheep shed like Matt Baker's got on his new farm and living in that. But
you've got to be practical and be pragmatic. And I was trying to think of ways
of living off grid and being able to spend what I've got wisely. So I am looking
into that and that is something that I'm committed to doing. But I'm just going
to say this one thing. God is going to judge governments and society for how it
treats their poor and vulnerable members. It's evil to allow people to freeze
and starve in 2023. Sally, thank you. You can go now to someone who's living off
grid. It's Steve Boulding in Shropshire. Steve, Sally, we just heard is tempted
to try and live somewhere where she's off grid. Tell us what that's like. Oh,
yeah. I'm not off grid as such. We were always off grid for gas because we were
in a cottage in a rural area. But we had a Calagas LPG boiler when we moved
here. But we never use it very much because we were never happy about fossil
fuels anyway. We've been with a genuine 100 percent renewable electricity
supplier for, oh, crikey, 25 years now. So that was the off grid bit. I think we
had that just as a backup for the very cold weather. But I think we barely use
half a tankful in about eight years. But what we have done now is we have had
our heat pump installed and having been saving up for it for a while. And we've
just hooked that up to our existing radiators rather than having all the fancy
new ones or the underfloor heating put in, because that would have been an
upheaval and a lot of extra expense. But in the end, we've ended up paying the
best part of 12000 pounds for our heat pump and the associated stuff, which
would include that's after a 5000 pound grant, which our installer, you know,
they knew their way around the system. Otherwise, I don't think we would have
got that. So it's a 17000 pound installation, but it's absolutely marvellous.
Our electricity consumption, which was previously we were using portable
electric heaters just to sort of top up the background heat and the log burners
that we have. But we never liked using them either because, you know, the
obvious problems with them. So we didn't use them much, except in the very cold
weather. So yeah, our electricity bills have stayed pretty much the same despite
the massive increase in overall electricity charges, just purely by that one
thing and the house is with a nice background warmth all the time now. So really
good decision, obviously, it's something we always wanted to do to sort of save
up for it. We've had so many nightmare stories, Steve, on this programme about
people doing what you've done, you know, just putting a heat pump on their
existing radiators, because the heat of the radiator is nowhere near as high, is
it? It's a low, you describe as a low background heat. Well, I mean, that's a
bit of an underwhelming way of putting it. No, I mean, you know, we've got a
smallish house, which is old and not very well insulated. But even this latest
cold spill is keeping us adequately warm, even though we've got the actual heat
pump sensor control dialed down to the minimum. And we are more than happy with
the heat we've got. We've never liked a hot house. What temperature is it then?
Let me just go and have a look. Right, the ambient temperature inside the house
and that's throughout all the rooms, you know, we've not bothered trying to
isolate any of the radiators is currently 18.5 centigrade. I think so. That's
about just over 60 degrees, isn't it? I think some people would think that was
cool. I think the recommendation is to have it, isn't it, at around 20? Well,
18.5 to 20 is not a huge jump. But to be honest, we're elderly, you know, we
have our share of 12 and so on. But I think about 18 is just more than adequate,
to be honest. What are you wearing, Steve? What are you wearing? Yeah, what am I
wearing? Yeah. I must admit, I'm slipping around in a t-shirt and a dressing
gown. Okay, so you're fine. Yeah, you're obviously not cold. Okay, lovely.
Thanks so much for sharing that with us, Steve. Thank you. We're coming to the
end of our time now. We've got about two minutes left. Anna Stevenson from Turn
To Us. Can you just give me your thoughts then, having listened to everything
that we have heard today, so many different problems? What would you suggest
that people should do who are in this situation where they really don't have
enough to make ends meet at the moment? The first thing to do is to make sure
you really are getting all the income you could be getting. We've talked to
Sharni, who had a misapprehension that meant she wasn't even looking into
whether she could get any benefits. Several of the people who've talked to us
today, I think are missing out on schemes they could be entitled to. So go on
the Turn To Us website and do a benefit calculation. It takes about 10 minutes.
It's free. It's confidential. We'll tell you what benefits you can get, how
much, and how to claim them. And remember, it's not just the income from the
benefits, but accessing those benefits then gets you access to a whole load of
other schemes that can help you. The other thing to check out is grants, that
there are lots and lots of charities in the UK that give grants. Grants are like
gifts of money or things. They mostly give them to people with particular
characteristics. And you can go on our website and use our grant search to find
charities that want to help people like you. If you are in debt, get some debt
help, talk to one of the big debt charities. Don't get sidetracked into paid-for
debt solutions. Get free professional debt help from one of the big charities
and deal with it. Don't just ignore it because it only gets worse if you ignore
it. And that's such a huge stress to be carrying around with you. Anna Stevenson
from Turn To Us, thank you. And that's it from this week's phone-in. We're out
of time. But thanks to everyone who got in touch. And thank you very much for
listening. Call You and Yours is produced by Tara Holmes, the studio managers,
John Benton and Amy Brennan. We'll join Sarah Montagu for The World at One in a
couple of minutes. First, though, let's take a look at the weather. Here's Matt
Taylor. Thank you very much, Neil. Good afternoon, all. Well, tomorrow,
meteorologically speaking, is the start of spring. So it's perhaps inevitable,
as I cast my eyes into the weather charts, for next week, some of you may, and I
emphasise the word may, start to see something a little bit more wintry for a
while. Nothing particularly wintry out there this afternoon, though. Grey skies
for the vast majority across England and Wales. Those grey conditions could see
the cloud thick enough to produce some further bursts of light rain or drizzle.
But in the south-east of England, we actually have some heavier bursts of rain
set to push its way in, and that could make it towards the London area by the
time we hit the evening. We're not without the sun trend, though, best of which
so far today is in south-west England. That will continue around some western
coast throughout. Now for Northern Ireland, fairly cloudy, but some breaks may
start to appear along the north-east coast into the afternoon, but most should
be dry. Across Scotland, we've got some blue skies through some central areas at
the moment, cloudy conditions elsewhere. Those clearer breaks in central areas
could migrate towards western coast as we head into the evening. Temperatures
across the UK today, around eight or nine degrees at the highest. It will feel
substantially cooler than that for many, particularly across England and Wales,
given the strength of the north-east wind. Now through tonight, southern parts
of England will see more in the way of outbreaks of rain push the way westwards
towards the direction of south-west England, south Wales. The odd spot of rain
or drizzle elsewhere. Fair bit of cloud, but we see the cloud breaks. Western
Scotland in particular will see a touch of frost into the morning, and in the
far south-east of England, there could be some frost and ice around first thing
tomorrow. It does mean, though, for Wednesday in England and Wales, some of the
best of the sunshine will be to the east of the English Channel and across
south-east England. Cloudy elsewhere, again a few light showers, but I'm
optimistic a few more brighter breaks will appear through the day. Northern
Ireland, a mixture of cloud and the odd sunny spell to take you through
Wednesday, and across Scotland, some sunshine in the west, plenty of cloud
elsewhere, but through the day, Orkney and also Shetland will see increasing
amounts of sunshine, a cold day again in the wind. Welcome to the Spock. When
we're in the midst of it, we're going to make decisions that are different than
the decisions that we would make if we were looking from the outside in. Bold
thinking for a better world. We struggle to recognise or remember that these
inequalities come from somewhere. That's it. 9898 Longwave, on digital and on
BBC Sounds. This is BBC.