TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Just say Open BBC Sounds to get started. BBC News at 7 o'clock. Shamima Begum's
lawyers say they'll continue fighting to reinstate her British citizenship after
they lost a legal challenge. Ms Begum was 15 when she traveled to Syria to join
the Islamic State group. An appeals court accepted there was evidence she had
been a victim of trafficking but found that it was lawful for ministers to strip
her of her citizenship on grounds of national security. Dal Babu is a former
police chief superintendent who worked with Ms Begum's family. He believes it
would be safer to bring her back to the UK. We have to set an example as a
country. We would take responsibility for our people and other countries are
doing that and we seem to be an outlier who are not prepared to do that. So
these people can potentially become more dangerous where they are without any
control zone. Saturday's rugby Six Nations match between Wales and England will
go ahead after members of the Welsh team who'd threatened a strike agreed to
play. They'd been in dispute with the bosses of Welsh rugby because of
disagreements over contracts. More than a hundred professional players met the
professional rugby board for talks which concluded this evening. A compromise
package has been reached which includes a reduction to the contentious 60 cap
rule. Tesco and Aldi have joined Asda and Morrison's in limiting the amount of
some fruit and vegetables that customers can buy because of supply problems. The
issues have been blamed on mainly on severe weather in Spain and North Africa.
The handling of the police investigation into the disappearance of Nicola Bulli
is to be the subject of an independent review. Lancashire's Police and Crime
Commissioner Andrew Snowden said he'd asked the College of Policing to look into
the case including the disclosure of personal information about the mother of
two whose body was found on Sunday. And the Office for National Statistics has
revealed that data from the 2021 census suggests that the number of people in
England and Wales who've never been married has continued to rise. Nearly four
in ten adults have never been married or in a civil partnership up from three in
ten at the start of the century. BBC News. Continuing our celebration of the
centenary of BBC radio drama. The Huntsman now purposefully erected his
footsteps. Analyzing the most groundbreaking plays from the vast drama archive.
It's intensely physical. You can go to different places and tell the stories
from different points of view. Dramatic Beats with me Michael Simmons Roberts.
Everything in British storytelling, film, television owes so much to radio
drama. On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds on Saturday night at 8. Radio 4's long-running
series of thought-provoking talks, Four Thought, will be drawing to a close
tonight. There are nearly 400 editions in the back catalogue available to search
and listen to on BBC Sounds of course. And tonight in the last ever edition
Sheila Cook who produced around 150 episodes will be reflecting on what she
learned from her 11 years working on the programme. You can hear that at a
quarter to nine this evening just after the moral maze. Now on Radio 4 it's the
Archers and will things ever be normal again between Tony and Lillian? Lillian!
Lillian! I've got to get back. Will you wait a minute? There's something I
wanted to show you. Sorry but I don't have time right now. So when will you? Did
you have your chat with mum? Yes. What was it about? Well if you must know I was
here on behalf of Alice and Kate who are making the funeral arrangements and
need to know how we're all planning to get there. That's all sorted. Mum, you
and me and Pat can all travel together. Actually Tony the way things are at the
moment I'd rather travel in a separate car. What? I've explained to mum and
she's in agreement that I'll go with Leonie and James and she will go with you
and Pat in another car. Is this really necessary? Yes I feel it is. Can't we
show a united front for one day for Jennifer's sake? She would have wanted us
to. Please don't tell me what Jenny would have wanted. Lillian! I know full well
the last thing she would have wanted was for any of us to be upset or to upset
mum on the way to her funeral. Now if you'll excuse me. It doesn't have to be
like this Lillian. I'm truly grateful to you for making the time. Of course
David. Although you're about to start carving soon aren't you? Any minute yeah.
Linda. Oh Arjo good morning. Morning. Just a quick reminder. Sorry I'm running
late. I have a parcel arriving today between 1 and 3 p.m. Not to worry one of us
will be here. Great thanks. Better dash. Ardil. Yes. Don't forget the packed
lunch you requested. It's on the hall table fully labeled. Of course will do.
Thanks. Wow you make your guests a packed lunch. Is that a thing? I mean
certainly not something we factored in. Well if you mean is it a regular service
then no. But given enough notice I don't mind. Ardil is an exception of course.
He's been here so long it's less of a B&B and more of a home to him now. Wow it
really is the full experience here. Don't be disheartened David. Ambridge Hall
is a high-end long-established outfit. You really can't compare yourselves to
us. No I see that. Anyway as we were saying you seem to have all the right fire
and safety measures in place. Tea making facilities in the room itself which is
vital. Now I see that your room doesn't have an en suite. Yes we have the shared
bathroom which has been given a freshen up. Mum has the en suite so that's one
less person using the bathroom and Ben, Ruth and I have decided that we'll try
and use the downstairs loo as much as possible. Hmm not ideal but needs must.
It's imperative you make it clear to anyone interested in booking that the
bathroom is shared. Oh of course yeah. No it's more any you know last-minute
snags or issues we may not initially have thought of that I was hoping to get
some ideas about. David I can't know what would be required or best suited to
Brookfield even with my extensive experience and success rate unless I see it
for myself. You mean visit? Yes I could squeeze you in at some point this
afternoon. But the main reason I'm asking is to help Ben. Remember it's his
venture now. In which case I will definitely find some time to visit today and
cast a final eye over everything. Oh but we'll most likely be with the cows
Linda and I wanted to save you any trouble by coming here. David do you want Ben
to make a success of this or not? Yes. Good I'll see you later. These
adjustments to the architects drawings are very good Roy. She's managed to get
the square footage we were losing into the suites on the perimeter. Yeah yeah is
she out on site? Yes she's gone walk about with Peter. They'll discuss materials
and costing which I don't need to be involved in. I'm sorry I've got me timings
muddled up Ardil. I should have been here when she arrived. Don't worry Peter
was on site and Andrea's no shrinking violet. If we're not about she gets stuck
in and makes use of the time. If one of us can be here in future though. I'll
make sure I'm here next time. I would have been here myself only I was way late
on calls this morning. Everything okay? Yes fine just my sister and her kids
doing my head in. Oh right you two. Why who's been bugging you? Don't get me
started. Not your neighbor again? Yep. This is the man who lost his wife
recently? I mean I feel for him honestly. I mean once upon a time he was family
but he's taken me and Kirsty at our word and now he's popping around all the
time. He was over last night for dinner brought a shepherds pie and some posh
wine. That's nice. Only Kirsty's right. He does love the sound of his own voice
and once he's got some wine in him it's like he picks a topic from the news and
just rants about it like he knows all there is to know. Yeah and when he finally
stops Kirsty and myself have to think of something to say that doesn't
unintentionally come out as being insensitive. Oh it's a minefield Ardill. Now I
do understand the most innocent comment can seem offensive or hurtful to someone
who's suffered a tragic loss and well I'm known for putting me foot in it so the
whole thing just makes me nervous. So stop inviting him over simple. We can't
because it's the right thing to do isn't it? Not if you don't mean it. Well we
do sort of just I mean but his family's always calling around to check in on him
and he says he hates it makes it feel like he's being babysat. I reckon he keeps
coming over to ours to avoid the family checking in. Well that doesn't sound too
bad as soon as things settle he'll get back to his new norm. Now he's invited me
and Kirsty round to dinner tomorrow night to thank us for the dinner he brought
us last night. So decline. So another awkward night on the counts for me and
Kirsty. Roy you've just spent ages moaning about the guy. Why on earth would you
accept a dinner invitation? Because. The right thing to do has to come with the
right intention otherwise it's hypocrisy. Hello. We'll be right out. We need it
outside. Can I give you a hand with that? Oh you're alright Lee. I should look
where I put things. Here let me sweep up the soil you put the trays back.
Everything okay? No. A case of more haste less speed. Planted the broad beans
and then I go and knock the trays over. Idiot. Accidents happen. This was
avoidable. Have you spoken to Helen today? Oh as a matter of fact I have and she
seemed very happy. Did she? I tell you Tony since I switched my perspective on
the whole situation with the girls it's like this massive weight's been lifted.
Okay California's a long way away but we can all still talk as often as we can
online and they can come here and maybe Helen and I can take the boys over
there. Oh that's great news Lee. Yeah and I wanted to say thanks Tony. For what?
If it hadn't been for your sound reasoning I'd still be moping about thinking
Helen wanted to get rid of me. You are very welcome. If only everyone was open
to a little sound reasoning. Is this about Lillian? Afraid so. She'll come round
surely. Oh you don't know my sister. She's as stubborn as a mule. Linda. No
there's no need to be alarmed. Hope you don't mind I let myself in. Now there
are many things here that need addressing. You're not going to step into this
kitchen in those boots are you? Yeah of course I'm going to remove my boots but
you know this is a working farm and our guests will know that comes with all the
reality of a working farm. No no no David that's a rookie mistake. Your guests
want to experience their idea of farming not the stark smelly muddy reality.
Smelly? Oh yes there is a distinct odour life in here that's a little too close
to reality for my liking. Well with all due respect you're not our guest so your
liking doesn't really... I have come to help remember. Now I don't see a space
for the guests when they're not in their room. Please tell me they're not
expected to be in here. Yep we've cleared the dining room for them. Well yes you
may think you have but you'll need a television in there. They can have
breakfast without watching telly surely. Or you could install a television in
the room and you may wish to consider a cleaner. Linda we want to make money
from this venture not fritter it away. Right that's it. What? Clearly you have
no idea what it's like to have a real live guest staying at your B&B and I
cannot in all good conscience let you loose on the world of bed and breakfasting
without a trial run of this place. I will be making a booking and staying here
in row as a guest tomorrow night. Oh I'm sure that's not necessary we've got
your notes. David learn not to look a gift horse in the mouth and please address
these matters before I arrive. You sure you don't want to share this? No thanks
I've got my packed lunch. We'll take a quick half hour and then get back out
there with Andrea before she heads back to London. Sure. Ardill. Yeah? I'm sorry
if my going on about Brian upset you it's just I'm sorry. Don't worry about it.
Right good only I didn't mean to. Look if you want to feel sorry for him then
feel sorry for him if you want to moan about him then moan but doing both is
crazy. You're complaining about him for taking you and Kirsty at your word. Yeah
you're right. I bet he sleeps in your armchair with the television on because it
makes him feel normal. How do you think he'd feel if he could hear you now? Yeah
I'm an awful person. It's probably the only real sleep he has right now. Yeah of
course and I'm sorry again if I've spoken out of tone. Roy stop apologizing.
Sorry. I lost someone close a few years ago. It's bad enough you're going
through hell the last thing you need is people being insincere and offering fake
support. So that's two taster sessions and anything for the boys? Oh they'll be
with Helen I'm getting some quality time in with my girls before they leave.
Well they'll have a wonderful time with the horses. I can see that Evie's
already taken to one of the ponies. She's not stopped stroking them since we
arrived. Looks like she's a natural. Is she the youngest? Evie yeah. But will
Alice be taking the lesson? Well it'll depend on the rota but we have a lovely
team here animals and stuff. Honestly they'll be fine. I'm sure I just wondered.
Perhaps if they come back for longer visit you could book some lessons for them.
Hmm we'll see. Oh you don't sound too sure. Actually they're about to move
abroad with their mum. Move? You mean permanently? Yes so I don't quite know how
it's gonna work once they're settled. I want to make the most of the time I've
got with them while they're here. Good plan. It's gonna be such a wrench when
they leave. I can imagine. We never know what tomorrow brings so we may as well
make the most of today. I'm sorry Lillian if I'm speaking out of turn I was so
sad to hear about your sister but for the life of me I can't think why you'd
want to make more distance between you and your brother at a time like this. Lee
I know you mean well but... He's hurting Lillian because of Jennifer's death and
because of the distance between you two. When you could be closer than ever.
It's not always that easy. It is if you let it be. I'm sorry I know it's not my
place but we should make the most of the present while we still can. If a sudden
loss doesn't teach us that then what does it teach us? Front row is next this
evening but first let's hear from Michael Burke about tonight's moral maze. Lord
Elgin lost his marbles in the end or at least was forced to sell them for less
than half what it had cost him to remove them from the Parthenon and died in
impoverished exile. Now we may lose them too as part of a complicated deal for
the British Museum to return them on a kind of permanent loan to the Greeks.
Justice? Writing and historic wrong? Where would you stop? Wider question. What
about reparations paying off those whose ancestors were enslaved in the days of
Empire? A moral imperative long overdue or an ethical nonsense not to mention
practical minefield? Paying for the past the moral maze in three quarters of an
hour. Now on Radio 4 here's Front Row with Nick Ahad. Hello. Tonight the actor
who has stepped behind the camera for his feature film directorial debut and
come up with something that appears to be a British answer to Jordan Peele's Get
Out. Nathaniel Martello-White on his movie The Strays released today on Netflix.
I'm joined by two artists who drawn their British Asian working-class roots in
different ways. Shaila Kumari Singh Burman is the visual artist whose work lit
up the theatre in neon during the pandemic and Dwinda Bansal creates immersive
works often involving film. In 1979 my father started introducing video into the
shop. Well my father always had a love for film and when he came to
Wolverhampton although he worked as an electrician he also at night used to help
out at the local cinema which used to play Indian films. I suppose it was a
natural step for him to think well how can we as a business start supplying our
local community. Both Dwinda and Shaila join me in the studio to discuss what
connects them and what separates them as Shaila's latest exhibition opens in
Liverpool. Winner of the Sony Photographer of the Year Award Craig Easton joins
me to discuss the life and work of the pioneering New Yorker photography critic
Janet Malcolm as a new book celebrating her life is published and if you've ever
told yourself I am NOT throwing away my shot some exciting news before 8
o'clock. First tonight a disturbing thriller that looks at race class and Middle
England suburbs comes to Netflix. After winning Best UK Short at the 2017
Raindance Film for his first short film Clam, writer director Nathaniel
Martello-White began working on his debut feature The Strays. The film tells the
story of a young black woman who escapes from her inner city life with a violent
partner and mounting financial pressures to a seemingly perfect life full of
village fakes, fundraisers and two mixed-race children who importantly to her
look almost white. Inspired by a true story it stars Ashley Medecki who was
BAFTA nominated for her role in County Lines. As the movie begins things are not
going well for lead character Cheryl. I'm sick of it sis, I can't breathe here.
What is up with you? Cheryl calm down. No, no they look at you like you're
worthless. They make you stand there and wait like you're some sort of reprobate
or something like you're shit on the sole of their shoe. Who makes you wait?
You're not making any sense. Is this one of your dips? The housing office was
down there earlier asking for help with the rent. You've got a job. You and
Michael need to stop living fancy off those credit cards. I won saleswoman of
the year three times in a row. I shouldn't be where I am now. Carl, go check on
your sister. I want more. Is it wrong to want more? Ashley Medecki as Cheryl in
the opening scene of The Strays. Now the next time we meet Cheryl she's using
the name Neve and speaking in a different accent somewhere in the home counties.
Wonderful morning. Wonderful morning isn't it? Wonderful morning isn't it? Isn't
it just? And you're looking just divine as usual. Charmer. You coming to my
charity gala this Friday? We're opening up the door. Oh exciting. Disability in
the Gambia. Sounds splendid. Shall I put you down for 500? Pounds? Yes. Oh no of
course. 550 even. Happy to help. So kind. Well writer, director Nathaniel
Martello-White joins me now live down the line from London. Nathaniel welcome to
Front Row. Great to be here. Thanks for having me. Now that scene that we've
just heard begins with Cheryl or Neve as she is now rehearsing in the mirror how
she'll greet her neighbour when she leaves the house and she reveals this effort
involved in maintaining this new persona. You actually use improvisation
sometimes when you're preparing. Tell me how you came up with that scene. Yeah
it's really a good question. We were, funnily enough that was the scene we were
shooting on the last day of the of the shoot and as she was in front of the
mirror and we were doing all of her routines in front of the mirror scenes one
after the other and I just felt when she was in front of the mirror essentially
putting on this new face that I just wanted her to start talking to herself and
the first scene is like wonderful morning is her first line so I just started to
get Ashley to repeat that line and to almost rehearse her you know her wonderful
morning. She does that every morning sort of thing and it just really stuck and
it kind of you know that you've got De Niro in front of the mirror and taxi
driver there's a thing about you know Vincent Cassell in La Haine people in
front of the cat in front of the mirror speaking to themselves was sort of
iconic. Neve's standing in there saying are you talking to me? So she's getting
ready to put her mask on really isn't she and this this moves about race the
complexities of racism microaggressions they're really deftly explored in the
movie there's a moment where a white acquaintance says to Neve you're
practically one of us as a huge compliment there's a dinner party and they
discuss white flight tell me about the idea behind pushing those notions what
are the themes that you're exploring here? I'm definitely exploring questions
around Britishness and the British dream and I think I'm really exploring the
sensation and the experience a lot of people of color have existing in
predominantly white spaces and I was really interested in that modulation and
how they manage that and sometimes even subconsciously without even realizing it
and and then I was also really interested in you know how I guess systemic
communities can create the feeling as if you have a laid-about weight on your
back and in fact I was really interested in the idea of even a mother sort of
fleeing her responsibilities and you know essentially obviously she's not in the
best sort of relationship at that point in time but but to almost yeah to go to
sort of leave in pursuit of this dream no matter the cost I was really
interested in that as a sort of cautionary tale that that takes us into
conversations around race and motherhood. Yeah the pursuit of the dream it's
everything is viewed by the prism of what blackness because the dream is to live
essentially as a white person in the white suburbs isn't it? Absolutely I think
the white middle-class bourgeois ideal is a really powerful one you know and I
think it's something she desires and I feel like maybe she feels she deserves it
and hasn't been given a fair crack of the whip as it were and so yeah I think
it's a really powerful culture and I think yeah one in which she aspires to and
one in which she becomes and I think we always felt of Cheryl slash Neve that if
she'd have grown up in a proper functional nurturing environment that she
probably would have become you know deputy head mistress and she probably would
have got the big house and stuff it's just that she grows up in a sort of legacy
of trauma. Well she also grows up and we see at the beginning that the tower
block and we jump from Cheryl's life in the tower block to this life that Neve
has in the leafy suburbs and it feels that locations are quite important it
feels like we're watching two entirely different England's was that something
that was important to you as well? Absolutely I guess I've always felt you know
I didn't grow up in a you know a white picket fence leafy suburb I come from
London I come from South London and there is a chaos to the urban city I mean
there's also an incredible culture to it and everybody sort of butting up
against each other but I always felt there was a strange kind of idealism I had
about the suburbs and about the sort of the perfection of the suburbs and the
kind of idea of safety and community and kids playing out on the lawn and it's a
thing I think which a lot of filmmakers... Where did you get that? Because if
you didn't grow up with the white picket fence where did the idea come from?
Well what my my dad actually his his mom was based in Billericay in Essex and
when I was growing up when we'd go there on Boxing Day we would I'd sort of play
out around there and I was always struck by that sort of suburban right kind of
environment and an atmosphere and I think you know in life you just kind of
you're absorbing these things and then when it comes time for you to make a
movie I felt like I wanted to I also wanted there's there's a subgenre aren't
there of those sort of suburban thrillers and I think I just it felt natural
that this movie should sort of take place within that subgenre. There are also
clearly lots of cinematic influences audiences might see parallels with the work
of Jordan Peele I mentioned director of Get Out and Us do you see The Strays as
being part of that subgenre of what we might call black horror? Yeah I mean I I
guess so I sort of feel like I want to leave that open to interpretation rather
than state that as a fact I guess for me I've always been interested in using
metaphor or satirical tropes to explore the black experience because I think
it's a really complex thing to step into and when you when you sort of set that
up against genre or against metaphor it frees it up and I think it allows people
to sort of come towards you and and maybe even experience the racial discussions
in a way that they're not even conscious of and so I think genre feels good for
that and I think Jordan Peele has obviously exploded open this place where where
that now is recognizable. Tell me about the inspiration for the film where did
it come from? Well initially my mom was telling me a story that she basically
overheard about a biracial woman who had essentially eloped to life and had
started again in a predominantly white community and had two children who were
white passing and and was sort of denying the existence of her past I don't want
to sort of give any spoilers away but sort of this whole other life that she
lived and responsibilities that she had and that story really stayed with me and
I just was like hmm I kind of feel like there's a there's a movie in that
somewhere. Well clearly there was. One of the things I mentioned the mixed-race
children so colorism is something that it's a big subject it's not something we
talk about very much in the UK is that an important subject for you to explore?
Definitely I mean I come from a mixed-race family my mom's biracial and I guess
my siblings and my cousins when I guess when you come from a mixed-race family
you're not defining things necessarily racially because you kind of accept the
fact that you're you're just this cocktail of different shades and complexions
but what's really interesting about that is that you know mixed-race genes do
strange things sometimes and so you know you can have one biracial parent and
one black parent and come out looking incredibly fair and even white passing and
so that then dictates a person's experience in society and how they're viewed
even though they have the exact same genetics as their siblings so I was always
really interested in in exploring the nuances of that and it and I don't think
people really do explore the nuances of race. Absolutely well look let's hear
some more of it here's a scene featuring Neve and she's hoping to impress the
almost entirely white and very wealthy crowd at a garden party. Welcome to our
home a massive thank you to you all for making generous contributions today we
dedicate our time to those less fortunate growing up in barren terrains where
access to the basics becomes a gargantuan struggle where simple eye or ear
infections can lead to blindness and deafness when a simple course of
antibiotics could afford that child a life of seeing the sunrise and hearing the
birds sing in the morning. Well as people will hear there Neve adopts language
of well of white saviors and she's trying to ingratiate herself how important is
that to the themes of the movie she's distancing herself from her blackness
isn't she? Yeah it's a massive part of it and I think she's trying too hard
clearly I mean she's going into the extremes of that and we always felt that
this gala that she throws in the movie is almost going to be her crowning moment
right and there are obviously there are many many layers to that gala because
it's it's about you know impoverished children in the Gambia and she's yeah
there are layers to it that are actually really complex that I think the movie I
think you have to see the movie to really sort of feel what those are but I
guess for me it was the irony you know that she's kind of doing this white
savior thing as a woman who's eloped a life of chaos you know. And it felt very
significant that one of the things that she's organized for this this gala is a
recital of Elgar's The Dream of Durantius that's not a coincidence is it? No I
was I was looking I was looking for a piece that really encapsulated the themes
of her journey you know a sort of soul in judgment yeah somebody sort of facing
judgment and having a kind of downfall and I felt yeah that that that piece just
really felt like it really spoke to me in terms of themes and then for me it
really became quite a big part of the movie her her and the choir and sort of
getting that piece ready and in a way it also being her downfall. Right
absolutely now people might recognize you from your work as an actor you've been
in projects such as Steve McQueen's small axe films how did that experience as
an actor inform your directing? I mean it's a great privilege to get to see
someone like Steve McQueen work as an actor and you're always I think as an
actor you're learning from the process and I'm also getting the opportunity to
watch great directors work and then I think my experience as an actor really
feeds into how I how I direct actors and I feel in a way it's sort of similar to
football you know where like you know a lot of those football managers have been
footballers they've played the game right they know what the game means and I
feel that way about being a director and I've worn many hats because I've also
been a playwright and that hat is very specific because I think as the
playwright you're not the director but you have a in terms of the I guess the
creative vision of the piece the design of the show and all those things you are
the auteur in the room you know and I think that the playwright and the actor
sort of marrying together for me sort of was where I sort of found myself as a
director and then my just my love of cinema and consumption of cinema learning
the language of it. Yeah you mentioned some of the first writing you did was for
the stage of play Blackter was performed at the Young Vic has that I'm assuming
that's helped you hone your craft and it's influenced your screenwriting hasn't
it? Absolutely yeah and you know my first two plays you know Blackter a
satirical a satirical comedy around for you know male black actors competing
against each other those characters didn't even have names they were called
black yellow brown and dull brown so I was already exploring the you know the
idea of what colorism there right yeah yeah completely and reducing them really
to sort of shades and then my my second play Torn which was on at the Royal
Court was just a you know a big family drama and so I was really becoming
interested in themes of family I'm gonna try to do this without spoilers because
as you mentioned a family drama let's return to the strays in the final act of
the film it feels like you want to play with the audience's sympathies was that
important for you to test where our loyalties lie as as we get to the final act?
Absolutely I I felt even though the movie is a thriller I wanted the the
audience to be deeply conflicted with how it plays out and and who they're
rooting for in the final confrontation because I always feel a lot of the time
in thrillers by the time you get to that showdown there's just one psychopath
you know and like you know and the rest of them are just trying to sort of run
for their lives whereas this time round I I wanted to sort of play with the
nuances of that and and and let the audience decide. Well we'll have to let
people to watch and see where the psychopaths are. Nathaniel, Martilla White
thanks for joining us. Pleasure thanks a lot for having me. The Strays is on
Netflix now certificate 15. Now on the one hand artist Shaila Kumar Singh Burman
and Dwindar Bansal might have little in common. Shaila was made an MBE for her
services to visual art in last year's Queen's Birthday Honours. She's a graduate
of the Slade School of Arts and her work lit up the tape during the pandemic
drawing crowds of thousands that work remembering a brave new world drew on
Hindu mythology Bollywood imagery and colonial history. Dwindar's first degree
was in computer science and her first entry into the art world was in the
marketing department of Birmingham Rep. She now works as an artist producer and
presenter who creates immersive artworks featuring several media. What connects
both of them is that they are working-class British Asian women whose work can't
help but reference their cultural heritage. Shaila is a Liverpoolian Punjabi and
Dwindar is Wolverhampton born to Indian Kenyan parents. Welcome to both of you.
Thank you. Now Shaila you've had a very traditional art education, art
foundation course from Southport College of Art and Design, degree in fine art
printmaking and masters at the Slade School of Art. I'm giving you your own CV
here. What was it like for you to enter the art world in the early 80s after you
finished your masters? Oh well you know it was actually quite tough because I
mean it seems quite a long time ago now but I mean you know I was pretty much on
my own. I think you know when the art teachers and lecturers you just kind of
you just left it's like you were just pretty much chucked on the street you know
and fortunately it was the days of the GLC so you've got the ethnic minority
unit run by Pramindavir and in a way I think I just created my own job and I got
this residency with Southall Black Sisters. I painted a mural with Kee Piper for
Southall called Southall Black Resistance. I was doing lots of jobs in schools
because in those days there was a lot of money for artists to go into schools.
It's very hard to become an academic but I don't think I particularly wanted to
become an academic because a lot of politics involved in teaching in an art
school and I could see that. But you're talking in this way but you had a first-
class degree you'd come from the Slade School of Arts, GLC by the way, the
Greater London Council and you were able to apply for these ethnic pots of
money. Yeah. But you couldn't walk into a job where I imagine your
contemporaries found it easier. Probably and I mean you know well all I can say
is you know shame on the on the art world, on the institutions. I mean you know
they should have taken you under their wing or just said like I mean I made a
piece of a nine etchings called the Right Series which are obviously based on
1981 uprisings you know and they were only quite like 20 years later. I would
say yeah the establishment where they're here probably would say well we have
taken you under our wing and it only took two decades. Is that a frustration?
Well you know what, I don't really think about it as a frustration anymore you
know because in a way I just don't let them bother me or get to me because you
would never make it work in your studio if you let them you know bother you. I
just kept on going because fortunately my mum had set me free, they wanted me to
do, they could see that I was talented at something and you know next thing I
knew I was showing at the ICA and Royal Academy Stores trophy. I just I've
always just gone off and done my own thing. I've never really let the art world
like you know knock me down or pull me down or put obstacles. I just don't
think, thinking about it, I just don't think they can handle me and actually
quite frankly I still don't think they can handle me. I just keep doing my own
stuff. I'm gonna do my best to handle you tonight. Dewinda, I mentioned that
you've got, you don't have a traditional art education, your first degree
Computer Science. What was it like for you to enter the art world? A little time
if I may say so after Shiloh. I think well for me it was a case of I didn't
really know what I wanted to do for a degree and then my oldest brother was 20
years older than me and we were approaching the Y2K problem and he said get into
computing because you're gonna make loads of money and you can clear all your
debt, you'd be really rich and actually he's probably right. But and then I
think part way through my degree because I was the last person to, the last year
to make it into the grant system and I decided then I was just like no this
isn't for me and so I left university, started volunteering and then I found out
about this opportunity and it was a positive action it was called then and it
was through the Independent Theatre Council and it was specifically for people
who were trying to get into the arts but couldn't find a way in and that was me
and so that and then you sort of got placed and then my placement was at the
Birmingham Repertory Theatre. And at that point I didn't really know what I
wanted to do and I just said I think marketing's for me and then I did that and
discovered it wasn't for me, I hated it and then sort of found myself at stage
door going down to the back of the at the theatre and thinking what are they
doing in there and I'd quite like to know about storytelling and theatre making
I'd like to be in the thick of that instead of being upstairs stuck in an
office. And you've ended up creating immersive works and visual installations
and it's interesting that for both of you the thing that you share for sure is
the fact that you access these pots of money that were ring-fenced for people
that look like you two. I know you both have slightly different relationships to
your well your cultural heritage tell me Dewinda about drawing on your cultural
heritage for your art. Well I think for me I was working as an immersive theatre
producer and I was creating productions about with the people stories and and
then around about 2015 I started to question my own identity and my own heritage
and I brought a couple of things with me actually which is one of them is my
father's videotape from the video shop and his business card and other things.
But I really wanted to started exploring the archive of material that we had so
my father died in 1988 very suddenly and as a result of that our shop closed
down which was a part electrical shop and part video rental shop and everything
got put into storage in the garage from 1988 until 2015-16 which is when I
thought actually I want to explore work that tells a story of the working-class
South Asian community from a lived experience that feels authentic that is
authentic and who better to tell it than someone who's actually lived through it
so I thought let me just do it. And the result was Jamboree cinema installation
it was in Birmingham last September in the mailbox as part of the Commonwealth
Games Birmingham 2022 cultural festival I went along and it was it was like
being in well it was in your dad's shop looking at all the videos all the lots
of Bollywood videos we went into your teenage bedroom as well and it was
incredibly rich and the cultural heritage you simply couldn't ignore it. Shaila
tell me about drawing on your cultural heritage for your work. Well I mean I do
draw on it all the time but I mean it does come out subconsciously I don't think
about it beforehand you know I think it's just always been there because I was
quite traditionally we entered the Hindu temple regularly we saw Bollywood films
all the time you went to the ice cream van which you know it's like even that's
almost like I draw on the colours and the patterns and the forms in that so I
think you know I think when I use say like Bindi's or Indian junk and Bollywood
pop art materials I mean I don't think about them constantly I actually love I
love all that stuff also when you're at art school you know they don't really
encourage you to use your own indigenous art materials it's still like you know
traditional stuff like paint mind you I am a printmaker I'm an etcher so that's
quite different but they won't say why don't you go and buy a packet of Bindi's
You take it upon yourself to use them in your in your artwork as well yeah
because you know I mean I like to subvert Bindi's because obviously the
traditional thing about getting married I'm not really interested in the whole
nuclear family thing. Just explain what a Bindi is. Well it's usually a red
either stick on or paint on and it does represent... In the middle of your
forehead? Yeah and it does represent you getting married so I just thought when
I saw all these like decorative ones I started playing around with them I did
all these body prints and there were these Bindi's that look like tadpoles and
they look like and I put them when I did these body prints you know kind of like
in my fanny because I just thought they look really cool and I thought well this
is good because this is like well action happens and and they've been quite
successful so I've used all my you know cultural Indian junk and stuff because
either way I mean but what I do is... But you're also proud of your Liverpoolian
British working class roots as well right? Yeah what I do is I just want to say
that I mix traditional forms of art materials with Indian stuff so I mix them
and that's why I like to think they're a bit of a hit. Sorry what did you say? I
missed your question? I was talking about your roots as a Liverpoolian as a
British person as someone who's working class I want to talk about the
importance of that and Dawinda that's something you can relate to as well born
in Wolverhampton I know that your working class roots are something that are
important that come out in your work as well right? Absolutely because I think
it's the untold story really about the working class roots of the and how
difficult it was and I think really a lot of my work it's playful it's fun it's
a bit heritage it's about art and it's an also I suppose a dedication to that
pioneering generation and that community of all the hard work that they did and
I'm from Wolverhampton I'm female I'm Asian I'm Sikh, Kenyan, Indian and I've
got this accent. And those are all things that come together that you experience
in your installations you make you make film as well don't you? I do make film
because I think that well I'm sort of multidisciplinary I think it just for me
I'm ultimately a storyteller and I think that really comes back from watching
hundreds and hundreds of these Bollywood films that we did and of course like I
pirate copied a lot of them as well. And you have just admitted that on national
radio but that's okay maybe the statute of limitations. Do you have do you have
a problem being recognized by the art world as doing something legitimate? I
think it's very difficult because initially no one supported my work and I mean
no one by the means of the establishments and some of those larger organizations
where I really feel that this artwork belongs and should be and should be seen
and if there's support there it's like well you could show it here but then we
don't have any money to pay you but then when I had the Commission for the
Commonwealth Games thousands and thousands of people walked through those doors.
Shaila when you hear De Winder talking about this do you feel plus chance? Do
you feel like I've heard all this before and this happened when I was coming up?
When you hear the fact that she's not being recognized in this way? Yeah I mean
you know I mean she's just a bit younger than me so I mean I've got like a more
years ahead so I've been doing a little bit longer but I hear her story because
you know we should be recognized a lot more and we've been I think our stuff's
brilliant I mean everyone is I know everyone's after me now as you know I'm
established now and everything and everything that phones going off and emails
are happening you know but this should have happened to me 40 years ago I've
been doing this 40 years now and I've done it all alone that's why I think the
artwork made me feel a little bit guilty you know so I I'm flying the flag for
all of us and you know when De Winder says you know my show my piece should have
been in the museum in the home and I says well I'll help you out with that
because I want to support other younger artists because even though so I'm just
doing it I don't want to think that I'm just doing it for myself there's a whole
lot of South Asian women artists who you know who should be known a lot more I
mean I I know that but then again you know I'm gonna bring myself up here I
think I should be the main top most South Asian artist because I've worked my
butt off for this yeah so we just have to keep helping each other and we just
met today yeah although you have I know you've shouted out the De Winder's work
in the past you have supported her yeah exactly now let me just ask you finally
last week we featured on Front Row the UK's first South Asian gallery it's in
Manchester Museum yeah and it focuses on the lived experience of the South Asian
diaspora let me ask both you do you feel part of an artistic community that's
currently coming of age in the UK De Winder yes and no right I would say I would
say yes because there's more of it the the value of that work is being
recognized and our stories have been recognized and they're going into those
established places but I think it's very difficult because what we don't want to
do is to make South Asian artists compete against each other for the same space
right and I am that can happen and has happened I imagine Shaila you you're
quite happy to be not just part of this South Asian diaspora that's coming of
age but it sounds to me you want to appoint yourself the queen of it well I just
want to be seen as an artist full stop you know I know I mean you know I'm South
Asian but the end of the day I'm a British artist and you know and and I should
be seen as you should be seen as that not have a label because well well you
know I mean white guys were artists we don't call themselves well you're a male
female white man you they're just called artists I think it's a great point to
end on thank you so much for joining us and Shaila's latest exhibition
Merseyside Berman Empire MBE is on at Fact in Liverpool until the 18th of June
yeah go and see it throughout her career the distinguished writer Janet Malcolm
who died in 2021 was fascinated by photography she came to prominence through
her journalism for the New Yorker including six years as the magazine's
photography critic photography was the subject of her first book Diana and Nikon
and it has turned out to be the subject of her final book it was a memoir still
pictures on photography and memoir which has just been published well
photographer of the year Craig Easton joins me now to review the book Craig
thanks for joining us thank you Nick good evening now it's interesting that the
opening chapter of still pictures Janet Malcolm contrasts a picture of herself
taken as a small child with a 19th century portrait by the French painter Jean-
Auguste Dominique Ingrès she's reflecting on the relationship between painting
and photography in capturing the image of someone isn't she yeah I looked at I
I'm not sure she is really actually I mean I think I think the connection
between those two images the painting the photograph and their vague
similarities feels a little bit tenuous and it's it feels like it's used as a
sort of slightly clunky way of introducing her childhood memories and in that
sense I suppose the book does bring photography and memory together in the first
chapter but it sort of sets the tone for it in terms of its relationship to
photography this this book is unlike Diana and Nick on this book feels more like
a memoir told in fragments of memory and she uses these personal pictures as a
sort of springboard to dive into a pool of reminiscences I'll be completely
honest with you the word clunky was not one I expected to hear this this this
writing feels rich and potent and powerful no no no no don't I'm not talking
about the writing the writing is is phenomenal and brutal and funny and
brilliant but I think the the use of photographs in this way to you know a small
picture at the beginning I mean had Sally Mann did it with hold still and she
did it beautifully and I'm sure that Malcolm was aware of how she did that but
they follow similar paths but I think that although this memoir is lovely I'm
not sure the photography is is quite as significant in this book as it is in
Diana and Nick on right I suppose it's it's what we put on her because she was
so famed for her writing about photography it it almost feels like that's
desperate where we want in this memoir to go well I think the publishers knew
that in the title in that opening chapter she talks about the repertoire of
stereotypical poses that human beings draw upon when their likeness is being
captured tell me is that something that you lean into and push again or push
against as a photographer because as well as winning photographer of the year at
the Sony World Photography Awards you also won portraiture category as well
didn't you yeah it was a really interesting phrase and that repertoire of
stereotypical poses and and it did get me thinking it got me looking at those
two pictures that she talked about at the beginning of the chapter and you know
the composition the pose of the Bertrand painting is powerful and it reminds me
of Karsh's portrait of Churchill this sort of towering hunk of a man that's
glaring at the viewer and and then when you've I don't know if there's such a
thing as a repertoire though it feels like painting and photography approach or
can approach portraiture differently you know a painter I guess by definition
has to predetermine and stage the portrait and the and the composition and the
result of that is it's kind of an amalgam of the painters impression over many
sittings whereas a photograph is something that happens instantaneously right
and you know it can be more observational than that but when she's talking
specifically about that Bertrand picture she says that Angra what what he did
was he was really struggling to find a way to make that painting work and after
repeated sittings it wasn't working until she saw him sitting in a cafe yeah
it's it till Angra saw him sitting in the cafe in that way with his hands on his
knees and that feels to me very sort of familiar to an observational
photographer that in a sense the painter has seen something and responded to it
and then I said okay hold that pose come to my studio and let me paint you. As a
photographer I'm an observational photographer that's what I do and and that
feels like a very recognizable way and maybe slightly different to other
photographers who really compose their paint their their pictures. It does
really it's it's a wonderful and she tells she explains the moment so
brilliantly when he's he spots the the subject in the cafe with his hands
resting on his thighs it's it's a lovely piece of writing. Now the title of the
book Still Lives on Photography a Memory that conjures up other books most
famously Susan Sontag's On Photography. What does this book bring to this
section of our culture's library? Yeah it's interesting the title isn't it you
know because you know I have to remember that I'm coming at this as a
photographer and so it for you for me too it immediately conjures up thoughts of
Sontag and John Berger and Roland Barthes and David Campany more recently but
but he acknowledges Sontag immediately in his book and I think in a sense I'm in
straight question what does this bring to this section of our culture's library
I think it brings very little because I think it works better as a memoir than
does a book about photography. Right. And her earlier work that we talked about
just before you know really is a seminal text on photography Diana and Nikon is
is a brilliant piece of writing it's a collection of all her writing from the
New Yorker from the 1970s so it's a funny one I mean I think if you come at this
without the photographer's knowledge then you will enjoy it as a memoir and I
really did enjoy it but I was at the Baltic in Gateshead recently and there it
is on the shelf next to Sontag and Berger so I guess you know whatever the
purpose of giving it that title it seems to have worked. It gives you the
fullness of her life though doesn't it it's you understand why she's writing
about what she's writing about and does it not add therefore to our
understanding of her writing about photography now that we know more about her?
Yes in that sense in that sense it does I mean she's incredibly well informed
and you know and and her writing about photography as we mentioned earlier is
phenomenal and this gives it a bit of background talks about you know her
friends and her family and her parents family and her immigration from you know
the Czech Republic or Czechoslovakia as it was into into New York so yes it does
fill in that thing for people who know Janet Malcolm's work. At one point she
writes the events of our lives are like photographic negatives the few that make
it into the development solution and become photographs of what we call our
memories it's just beautiful as a professional photographer did that ring true
for you? Yeah I think it did yeah I mean I suppose it's a funny thing because I
think I've got terrible memory but but I can remember photographs that I've made
instantaneously things I made 30 years ago right there so so yes I mean I wonder
how that will change in in you know modern times now where photography is a much
more disposable thing and much more available to people but but do yes I do
think it works as a memory. Given how disposable photography is now and she also
talks about how a picture is a transformative act do you think that creative
nature of photography is is something that we properly understand still? Yes and
no I mean it you know it's it is transformative it can be transformative but but
not always I mean by definition it's transformative isn't it because it's taking
a three-dimensional reality and converting it into two dimensions but but
actually that that quote that you just mentioned when she's talking about
transformative act she's she's taking that from a previous book that she did of
her own pictures of called of burdock leaves and she she's connecting her
approach to Richard Avedon and Richard Avedon was very transformative in the way
that he printed these dark rich and you know contrasty pictures but then she
also talks about about Irving Penn and his pictures and says that his portraits
are recognizable first and foremost as pens and only incidentally pictures of
people and in that sense it thinks well yes they have transformed that they've
become pens so I think that's slightly different to a documentary photographer
where you know what you're photographing is a is actuality you're not creating
it you're not putting your stamp on it quite the same way as she does or Avedon
does or Penn does. So in in the in the fact that we can all take pictures so
easily I wonder if we lose something but as long as we go back to Janet Malcolm
there's still something still there to be discovered. Oh there's plenty to be
discovered and you know I think I really enjoy it I really enjoyed the book and
I really enjoyed her previous book and I really enjoyed the depth of thought
that she puts in. I think it's fair to say we can recommend it. Thank You Craig
Easton. Janet Malcolm's book Still Pictures on Photography and Memory is out now
and Craig's new book Thatcher's Children is available from craigeaston.com and
his show Is Anybody Listening is on at the Open Eye Gallery in Liverpool until
this Sunday. We finish with good news for the arts community north of the
border. Creative Scotland has announced that it has had almost seven million
pounds in funding restored following a u-turn on the Scottish government's
proposed 10% cut to the organisation's budget. On tomorrow's Front Row we'll be
reviewing David Hockney's new immersive exhibition and the latest film from the
Japanese film director Hirokazu Kurida whose 2018 film Shoplifters won the Palme
d'Or at Cannes. Join Tom Sutcliffe live at 7.15 and finally news for fans of
hip-hop historical musical. Five years after the Olivier Tony and Pulitzer Prize
winning show arrived on the West End it has been announced that Hamilton will be
heading out on a UK tour starting here in Manchester at the Palace Theatre in
November. I'll see you in the room where it happens. Good night. Front Row was
presented by Nick Ahad and the producer was Ekene Akulewu. The studio engineer
was Amy Brennan. After the news Michael Burke asks how should Britain make
amends for its colonial past. The storyteller and satirist David Sedaris returns
to Radio 4. I thought I'd support the movement the way I had become accustomed
to by donating money and then telling people I donated twice as much. The author
shares his incisive humour and social critiques of modern life and himself. The
moment I got my first vaccine I started thinking of the coronavirus the way I
think of scurvy. Something from a long ago time something that mainly pirates
get. A new series of Meet David Sedaris starts tomorrow evening at 6.30 on Radio
4 and BBC2.