TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Starts next Sunday night on BBC iPlayer. After admitting three counts of
indecent exposure, our correspondent Lucy Manning was in court. Wayne Cousins,
the Old Bailey herd, repeatedly exposed himself in the weeks and days leading up
to Sarah Everard's murder. This happened at least twice at a McDonald's drive-
thru in Kent and also in front of a female cyclist in a narrow country lane. He
had exposed himself at the McDonald's just four days before kidnapping Sarah
Everard. His number plate was passed to the police but they didn't check it in
time. The judge said the police's failure to question him about the indecent
exposures must have helped strengthen his feelings of invincibility. Tributes
have been paid to two women and a man, all in their early twenties, who have
been found dead in a crashed car two days after they were seen on a night out in
Newport. Another woman and a man are in critical condition in hospital. South
Wales Police said officers were investigating the scene and supporting the
families. The government says it hopes to open more legal routes for asylum
seekers if it passes new laws aimed at deterring migrants from crossing the
Channel in small boats. Under the legislation, illegal migrants would be banned
from returning to the UK or from applying for British citizenship in the future.
Refugee charities have called the plans unworkable. Firefighters have voted
overwhelmingly to accept a new pay offer, ending the threat of strikes. The new
deal includes a 7% increase backdated to July last year, plus an extra 5% from
July this year. Twitter has been experiencing major problems with posting some
images and links. The social media company blamed an internal change that it
said had unintended consequences. BBC News. ChatGPT is the artificial
intelligence technology that seems to be everywhere. It's an extraordinary
phenomena. It's burst on the scene. I'm Laura Lewington and I'm going to see
what ChatGPT can do. This is going to happen. We need to learn how to use this
technology effectively. Can it write good essays, suggest holidays, or simply
change our daily lives? All of the ethical questions that concern us when we
think about using AI, they're right at the centre in the use of GPT. And can it
even make a radio programme? Find out in a documentary by ChatGPT. This evening
at 8 o'clock on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Speaking of which, from the Tiger King
and the test through to India, the Modi question, we are in the midst of a
golden age of documentaries made by actual human beings, prising over the lives
of ordinary people living through extraordinary circumstances. But what happens
to the people featured in the stories, their families, their friends, once the
camera stops rolling? What ethical judgments should filmmakers make when telling
these stories? Subject is a new film which raises those questions, and one of
its directors, Camilla Hall, is on front row to talk about some of the
documentary subjects she's met and what fame or infamy has done to them. That's
coming up at 7.15. But now, Lily spots an opportunity in the arches. Hi Ben. Oh,
hey Lil. Looks like you're on a mission for Gran. How did you guess? At Flower,
Sultana's. She asked me to pick up some stuff on my way home from work. How
about you? Oh, I just needed an excuse to get out for a bit. Freddie's driving
me mad. Well, he is your brother. He's been in a foul mood all weekend. Why?
Chelsey won't join his team of tour guides. I'm not surprised. She's happy at
working in the orangery for actual money. So now, Freddie's trying to think of
new ways to recruit volunteers. Right. Oh, he's all he can talk about. Or rather
moan about. Honestly Ben, he never switches off, which means I can't either.
Yeah. I'm always acting as his sounding board. Actually, make that a punch bag.
Well, maybe I can help. Oh yes? Seeing as Freddie's lived in the stables before,
do you think you'd want to move back in? And live with Josh? Yeah, I've decided
to stay at Brookfield. So it would give Freddie a break from Lower Loxley, a bit
of space, and get him out of your hair. Hmm. So, what do you reckon? Sounds like
a great idea. Well, why don't you let Freddie know that there's a room
available, and if he's interested, he should have a chat with Josh. OK. It's the
right decision, Kate. Really. Absolutely. You've put so much into Spiritual
Home, it would have been such a waste for you to walk away from it now. I tell
you, Adam, I came very close. Well, thank goodness Dad took some sense into you.
And your plan to give it another five years sounds sensible. Only… Hmm? I've
been thinking… Dad might just want me occupied. What do you mean? What if he's
worried that if I sell Spiritual Home, I'll start interfering at Home Farm? I'm
sure that's not his motivation, Kate. No, no. I think Brian's praise and
encouragement was just him being honest with you. Really? Yeah, he's certainly
not mincing his words at the moment. After all, he's been pretty honest with me.
What do you mean about Mum's clothes? Yeah, he just told me how he felt. Right.
I think he did the same with you, Kate. Yeah, only less painfully. And I'm
feeling better about things now. Yeah? Well, I'll admit it was a bit of a shock,
him having a clear out so quickly. For me too. I mean, he's probably still
trying to process the funeral, but you know what Dad's like. He just wants
things fixed and quickly. Do you think that's what this is about? Oh, who knows?
He's clearly not thinking straight. Or thinking too straight. Maybe that's the
problem. He just wants to tidy everything away and move on from it all. Dad.
Hey. At least Mum's stuff is here now and we can choose anything we want to
keep. Yes. Well, I suppose we'd better start going through these boxes. Wait,
wait. Not just yet. I thought that's why you asked us over. Uh-huh, it is. But
there's something in particular I want to show you first. Oh? This box. Look.
Toys. And baby clothes by the looks of it. Do you recognise anything? Wait. Oh,
that looks like Whitney, one of my old dolls. Oh, I think that's my christening
gown. All the bits and pieces, Mum, kept from our childhood. Oh, gosh. That's so
sweet. Yeah. It's a bit of a jumble, though. Which is why I thought we could go
through it together. Claim what's ours. That's a lovely idea, Adam. Are you
looking for me? Unless you're still working. Nope, I'm done. I'm glad to be
home. Oh, bad day. Just this last client. Going on about the electric charging
station. Oh, really? Brandishing one of Jim Lloyd's leaflets. Impeccable. I'm
sure you'll like it. I'm sure you'll like it. I'm sure you'll like it. I'm sure
you'll like it. I'm sure you'll like it. I'm sure you'll like it. I'm sure
you'll like it. I'm sure you'll like it. I'm sure you'll like it. I'm sure
you'll like it. I'm sure you'll like it. I'm sure you'll like it. Oh, for all
it's worth, it mentions Brookfield, so this guy, well, he was enjoying having a
go. For all it's worth, I don't have a problem with it. Yeah, I think it's a
really good idea. Well, let's hope you think my idea is a good one, too. Sorry?
It's about the spare room, Josh. Oh, yeah. Is Freddy up for it, then? Forget
Freddy. I want to move in. I've got beer or, uh, beer. I guess it'll have to be
beer then. Excellent choice. Look, if you've got it in your head that I'll cramp
your style or something... I didn't say that, Lily. But I can tell you're not
sure. It's just a bit of a surprise, that's all. Here. Thanks. What's worrying
you? I'm just weighing things up. Come on. I'd be a great housemate. You reckon?
This is nice, isn't it? You and I, sharing a beer at the end of the day. Sure. I
know Freddie thinks I can be a bit of a square, but since splitting up with
Russ, I'm not taking life so seriously. I never had a proper student experience,
did I? So I think now is the time to do a house share. This isn't really student
living, though. Well, no, but... Auntie Shula wants the house looking after,
Lily. That doesn't stop us having parties, though, or organising game nights and
stuff like that. I work 12 hour days. I don't have time for games nights. All
the inclination. I won't let Auntie Shula down. And I'm good for the rent. I can
pay up front. OK. I've got the money, after all. Kitchen sales didn't pay too
badly when you hit your targets, which I always did. OK. Well, when would you
want to move in? I don't know. End of the week, maybe? Whatever suits you. Wow.
You're not lying when you say you want to change. Is that a yes, then? Why not?
Oh, this is going to be so much fun, Josh. So listen, if you're moving in, then
I guess you should know I'm planning on renting out the third bedroom as well.
Great. Yes, the more the merrier. My original plan was to ask Freddie, so I
reckon I should give him first refusal. Freddie? No, Josh. We can't both live
here. I need to get the rooms rented out as soon as. And if Freddie finds out
I've offered one to you and not to him... No, please, Josh. This is meant to be
a fresh start for me. I love my brother, but we need some space from each other.
If we move in here together, we'd only spend our time bickering. Good point. So
let's consider other options, please? All right. But I don't want this dragging
on. I promise. I'll find us someone before Freddie even knows there's a room
available. Now, I definitely had one, Adam. You cut the hair on yours. Why would
you remember that? Because you pretty much scalped her. It sounds like the sort
of thing you do, Kate. And you drew her makeup on with permanent marker. Well,
you obviously remember my toys far better than I do. Are you really that
desperate for a makeup and styling head? Yes, it's part of my childhood, Alice.
Debbie's childhood? Well, who's to say it's not the same one? It might have been
Debbie's before it was Kate's. It's not! Well, I always ended up with hand-me-
downs. Oh! Oh, here we go. What? I'm trying to stick up for you. You didn't get
hand-me-downs. I did. I ended up with all your old cast-offs. That's how it was
for Rory and me. We had excellent taste in toys. You should have been grateful.
Look, I'm taking the styling head, OK? What else is in there? Fine. Oh, what's
this? Oh, someone's milk teeth. Oh, they're definitely mine. You'll have claimed
everything in this box by the time we're done. Don't tell me you recognise your
milk teeth. No, it's just I think Mum would have kept mine, that's all. Oh,
yours in particular? I made such a big deal about leaving them out for the Tooth
Fairy. Me too. We all did. That's what children do. Anyway, I'm not going to
object. You're welcome to them. Yeah, they're gross. You can have them. They're
not gross. I kept all my own kids' teeth. Oh, you're still hoping for a payout
from the Tooth Fairy, are you? Come on, you two, there's a lot more to get
through. Right, what's next? OK, I'm digging down this time. Mm, what have you
got? A Prefect badge. That's mine. Oh, that's mine. That's it then. You know you
didn't have to collect your stuff so quickly. Well, most of it I'd already taken
to Brookfield. I just thought I'd come and get the last few things. There was no
rush, Ben. There is if Lily's moving in. Anyway, I wanted to tell you something.
Oh? You know this Facebook group opposing the electric charging station? I've
been reading the comments and... Oh, don't do that. I can't help it. Seriously,
Ben, promise me you won't go down that rabbit hole. You've got to look after
yourself and that means blocking out all this rubbish, especially anything on
social media. You know what people round here are like. One minute they're
complaining about it, the next they'll be queuing up to use it. Take no notice.
But what if they start saying stuff about Brookfield? We've been over this.
Eventually they'll move on. Would it make you feel better if I agreed to join
the group? Keep an eye on it in case... whatever. Would you? Of course. Just so
long as you steer clear, OK? OK. Right. You got everything? Yep, I think so.
Well, we had some fun times here, didn't we? Yeah. But now you've got Lily and a
third room to fill. Don't mention it to Freddie, will you? How come? Lily made
me promise. She doesn't want him moving in with us. I see. She's determined to
make this a fresh start. What, by moving a couple of miles down the road? Lily's
got plans. Oh, yeah? Regular film nights. And get this. If I go clubbing, she'd
like an invitation. And she wants us to designate one day a week when we share a
takeaway. Typical Lily. Only she could be so prescriptive about fun. When did
you say she's moving in? Sunday. Well, then you'd better enjoy your last week of
freedom. Can you clear a space for the pizzas? Ooh, they look yummy. Is that the
vegan one? I'm just stating a fact, Adam. Mm. Oh. You lucked out marrying Ian.
His pizzas are the best. Why did your teddy have such a stupid name? Uh,
Snugglebug is not a stupid name. Yes, it is. And actually, his name is Baloo.
Listen to yourself squabbling over a moth-eaten soft toy. I don't think you're
any better. Me? You've been just as petty, Adam. Yes, trying to claim that truck
for Xander. When in fact, it's Rory's. No, no, no. You see, the thing you don't
realise is that it has a dent in the rear side passenger door. See? Brian trot
on it. It is 100% mine. Oh, how convenient for you to have such a perfect
photographic memory. Just like Kate and her ridiculous milk teeth. Oh, you're
never going to drop that, are you? OK, OK, I'm putting a stop to this now. Well,
you started it. I did not. Uh, yes, you did. This might be stuff from our
childhoods, but we don't have to regress to being four years old. I think it's a
bit late for that now. Look, the fact is we can't agree on anything. Not
everything. Oh, pretty much. See? We can't even agree on that. I've managed to
claim one thing. A potato print painting. And that's only because I happen to
write my name on it, age five. Everything else we've argued about. And we
haven't even been through everything. Really? What's left? Uh, homemade
Christmas decorations. A pair of Wellington boots. Well, they look like mine.
Maybe books and a... Oh! What is it? Oh, for goodness sake. What? Mum's
handwritten list of what belongs to which of us. Oh, you're kidding. Seriously.
Toys, keepsakes, clothing, all itemised. I might have guessed. Mum always was an
expert at resolving arguments. It seems she's still got the knack. Well done,
Mum. Well, we'd better go through the list. I'm sure you'll be able to find
something. I'm sure you will. I'm sure you will. I'm sure you will. I'm sure you
will. I'm sure you will. I'm sure you will. I'm sure you will. I'm sure you
will. I'm sure you will. I'm sure you will. I'm sure you will. I'm sure you
will. Music And tomorrow Lily prepares to reveal something to Elizabeth and
Helen has the bit between her teeth. We are back in Ambridge at 7 o'clock
tomorrow evening. This is BBC Radio 4 where it's time now for Front Row with
Samira Ahmed. Hello. Random particles and cancer cells collide with the dark
matter of making documentaries on tonight's Front Row. Stephen Moffat and Lucy
Caldwell join me to talk about Collision, their contributions to a book of short
stories inspired by the science of the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. A new play
about the immortal life of Henrietta Lacks, the African-American woman whose
cancer cells, taken without her knowledge or consent, are still used to develop
treatments. And we shed a light on Subject, the film about the harm which can be
done to the subjects of documentaries. My family and I are the subjects of a
documentary called The Staircase. I remember the first time how hard it was to
see it on television. It just felt like the hugest invasion of privacy and like
we were never going to be safe again. Margaret Ratliff, one of the subjects of
Subject. I'll be talking to one of its directors shortly. It's been ten years
since scientists at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN in Switzerland proved the
existence of the Higgs boson, a particle that helps in the attempt to understand
the origins of the universe, as it explains how planets and stars could be
created in a mass-giving field. The hunt for the Higgs particle captured public
imagination from the start, so it's apt that to celebrate this anniversary, a
new book of short stories has just been written by prominent fiction writers.
Each story is based on CERN research and quantum physics and includes a response
from a scientist. The book is called Collision and the writers include Margaret
Drabble, Courtier Newland, Badeesha, and my two guests Lucy Caldwell and Stephen
Moffat, known of course amongst many other things for his adventures in space
and time as a Doctor Who showrunner. Welcome to Front Row, both of you. Can I
ask, how did you both come to be involved? Were you asked? Simply asked, got an
email asking if I'd like to do this and it sounded like such a mad idea. That I
instantly said yes. I usually say no or I ignore the email, but I just thought,
wow, really, they're going to send me some mad stuff from CERN and I'll write a
story about it that way. And Lucy, presumably, did you get to go to CERN as
well? We did, that was a large part of the appeal, you know, to meet with a
particle physicist, to talk particle physics and to travel. We did actually go
80 metres underground into the Large Hadron Collider, which was incredible. And
so did they match you with scientists? They did, there were various different
scientists giving a pre-see of what their research is and what they might like
to work on and talk about and we both chose dark matter. Yes, that's right. I
went to CERN at an earlier point and I was thrilled to discover that the
revolving door at the entrance was broken down and they couldn't fix it and the
Wi-Fi was a bit spotty and I thought, if you guys can't fix this. And tinfoil
everywhere. That's the best thing. In a building that's called the Anti-Matter
Factory, you know, and where they hope to produce the next Nobel Prize, where if
something goes wrong, you know, all of us are gone and everything is swathed in
slightly crumpled looking tinfoil. It's those human things, you know, that you
wouldn't imagine when you were, if you were imagining, you wouldn't know to
imagine that into your story. That was a fascinating thing. We had a rule on
Doctor Who that you couldn't have tinfoil on the set and it's the one thing that
they really do have is tinfoil everywhere. In the Anti-Matter Factory where
they're worried about storing anti-matter because it might fall up. That's what
someone told me. It might fall up the way. Well, as you've made clear, you know,
the idea of playing with time and mystery and dark matter is obviously a theme
that intrigues you both. Stephen, your story's called Going Dark. What can you
tell us about its theme? The conundrum that I was attracted by in the various
things I was sent was the one where the scientists took seriously the idea that
the universe might be trying to stop them starting up the Hadron Collider. They
took it seriously because so many things went wrong. So many funding bafflingly
disappeared that they actually invented a card game to allow the universe to
communicate with them to say, do you want us not to do this? Like it was
channeling you down one version of reality to stop things happening. So we're
going to hear you do a bit of a reading. It starts with a guest at a glamorous
party who has a disturbing encounter with a mysterious woman wearing a mask in a
locked room. And when he wakes up from what he thinks is a dream, he starts to
search for other people whose names he was given in the dream. Would you read us
a little? I couldn't shake the feeling that it had been real, though. It was
still impossibly vivid. Her bright liquid eyes, the slight tremor in her voice,
the shattering pain of the knife. I found myself checking my hand again. No
wound, not a trace, nothing. I tried to remember how the dream had ended. One
moment I'd been trapped there, my hand pinioned to the table, the next I was in
a cab home. But the cab journey had been real. The chimp woman and the knife and
the strange empty room. None of that had really happened. So how could it feel
so real? The words carving your neurons floated into my head. Her urgent stare,
her sad smile as she left. You are experiencing an adrenaline shock, she told
me. It will change the way you store your memories. Now, Peter Dong, who wrote
the scientific response to your story, said it's not impossible that the
subconscious or dreams, our subconscious, could pick up echoes from other
timelines in the universe that never occurred. Is that what inspired you? It was
in part. In fact, that part of it wasn't in the original piece. It was when he
and I were talking, because I talked to him quite a lot before I wrote the
story. And he came up with that and we were talking about that. And I love the
idea that all fiction is just, you know, really super talented writers being
able to channel events from other universes. That's a great idea. The premise of
that film is Three Days at the Condor. So you have those writers for the CIA who
are writing fiction, and it turns out that there's real Cold War plot lines in
the fiction. Wow. It's so interesting because so many of the particle physicists
talk about how we're not just neutral observers. We are creators of reality. You
know, when they're observing something, we can't observe something without
changing the result. And the physicists were talking about the ways in which
some of them were so superstitious they wouldn't want to watch an experiment in
case their desired result changed what happened in the experiment. I love the
idea of scientists being superstitious. Your story, Lucy, is called Dark
Matters, and in theory it's about uncertainty. Can you tell us a bit about the
premise before we hear you read from it? Yes, my story, it was inspired by a
conversation with a scientist quite late at night after our tour. And he was
saying that he thought there was something that we were fundamentally missing.
He'd spent his whole life researching dark matter, looking into what theories of
dark matter might be. And dark matter, it's the most mysterious thing. We know
it has to be there. There's about five times as much dark matter as there is
matter. But we have no idea what it is yet. And he said he was convinced that
all of our experiments, we were just missing something fundamental. Right, so
the way I've summed up your story is a scientist goes home to Belfast from CERN
where his mother is dying and revisits his old school, reconnecting with his
youthful optimism as a young scientist. Would you read us an extract? Of course.
The discovery of the Higgs had invalidated his supervisor's research and by
proxy his own, years and years of it. Overnight, meaningless. They'd been there
in the morning it was announced, not in the room itself but on the live stream.
The young Chinese-American postdoc who couldn't even speak just pointed, choked
up with emotion at the screen. It was impossible not to get a little swept up in
the emotion of that day. But as the implications of the discovery sank in, he
and his supervisor and the rest of their small team had gone back to someone's
office where there was a bottle of gin and a bottle of whiskey. His supervisor
had left CERN shortly after that, just didn't have it in him to start again.
It's like the opposite to when we think of that Nobel moment when Peter Higgs
realises his theory's been proved. It's unexpected to think of you writing about
what happens to the scientists whose theories are destroyed by the next
discovery. Why did you choose that? I chose that because some of the scientists
we were talking to had been working on one theory for 30 years. Long before
there was a technology to try out their theory. They were saying that in the
next couple of years there will be the technology and if the experiment goes one
way, if the particle goes up, it'll be an instant Nobel. If it doesn't, still
the research is important but somehow it's gone. That's why Peter Higgs had to
wait 50 years for his theory. So, question for both of you. Quantum physics is a
lot more like speculative fiction than traditional physics. Just thinking about
Peter Higgs waiting more than 50 years for a theory to be proved true, what
connections did you both see between your worlds as fiction writers and the
worlds of CERN? Stephen first. Well, when I went there, I went on a different
occasion. They are fascinated by the imagination. They talk about stories all
the time. Their response to the world is immensely creative. You sort of think
you might be surrounded by people who are not at all like you and are all vastly
cleverer, which let's be clear, they are vastly cleverer. But they are in style.
They're whimsical, they're funny, they're massively creative and it's an
incredibly moving place to be. It's an incredible international cooperation
where they can't get the revolving door to work. It feels like the ideal world.
I was sort of in love with it. I realised, of course, I couldn't really join in
because I don't know anything and I'm stupid. But it was amazing. Amazing place.
Lucy, what about for you? Yes, similarly I think both start with the what if.
Fiction, all of fiction starts with what if. What if this? What if something was
slightly different? What if something was wildly different? And so much of
particle physics, it starts with a premise long before you can have the
equations to prove or to disprove or to investigate it. Long before you have the
technology, before you have the experiments, before you know how to analyse
them. It's the what if that could change things. Scientists tend to be readers
of speculative fiction but often are also frustrated at how badly scientists can
be portrayed in fiction. I wonder what they both, well I don't know how many
scientists you spoke to, but what was the weight of your efforts once you read
your stories? Well I had a natural advantage when I was still running Doctor
Who. They're all Doctor Who fans. I had a little plastic TARDIS with me and Sue,
my wife, said to me, you're going to have to give them the TARDIS. Have you
looked at how they're staring at your little plastic TARDIS? So I did. I handed
it over and they took it into the Sern control room and put the little plastic
TARDIS on the desk. So, no, they loved Doctor Who. Well, they obviously loved
being Doctor Who. And one of the nice things about Doctor Who being a children's
programme basically is that some of us grow up and become writers or actors or
whatever as a result. But some people do become scientists. As a result? Yes.
Was there a particular story that any of them said had inspired them? No, they
didn't. I mean, they were insanely and slightly frighteningly knowledgeable
about Doctor Who. Surprising. I mean, really, really very knowledgeable about
it. But none of them, I remember saying that to Brian Cox once, the science one,
does it just annoy you, Doctor Who? What nonsense are we talking? He said, you
know, you're not really, you know, really, well, you're not any more wrong than
anyone else. Lucy, what did scientists say to you about, you know, your fiction
and also just, you know, the sense of how they feel science is portrayed in
fiction? I was interested to speak to Dr Michael Davis, who was someone else's
consultant actually, but he is one of the people who deals with what data to
preserve. And he's from Belfast as well. And he was telling me about John
Searabelle, who came from a very working class area of Belfast, couldn't afford
to go to university, so went as a janitor and as a lab technician, put himself
through a BA in maths, BA in physics in the same year, and he disproved
Einstein. And I loved, I thought that was no less magical, you know, that a
young boy like that, and they have a street named after him in Serein, we went
and stood on. So that was fascinating. And also meeting someone else, Dr Clara
Nellist, who is very active in LGBTQI+, and in representation and female
scientists. Lou Anne Goldie has a wonderful story here about a pregnant
scientist who's looking forward to her shavasana and her yoga because that's the
only space she has to think about matter and space and equilibrium. I know
there's some great stories in here. Has your experience changed how you think
about your place in the universe? Well, I've always had a slight suspicion. I
mean, think about going to CERN. I don't, I've always talked endlessly about
this kind of thing to my son, Joshua, who's, you know, big into science and all
that kind of stuff. So we've always had those conversations. And he's much
cleverer than me, so he understands it all and explains it. But I don't know
that it's changed anything. I think I've always felt a tremendous disquiet about
myself. And I've always wondered, you know, what is it that's going on behind
your eyelids? You know, what is that thing of actually being aware? And how can
you and who are you and who's looking out of my eyes? All that stuff is always,
always absolutely freaking me out. Yes, at the same time as I went to CERN, I
was researching, as I have been for some years, the world of young people
devoting themselves to extreme religious life. And there was something, it's
funny, there's something in the devotion of that quest that I found with the
scientists at CERN who, there's a devotional aspect to the work they do, to the
belief they have, to the community they have, to the nobility of their
enterprise. And some of the ways they talked were similar to some of the young
people who talk about entering religious life. And it made me think about these
very different paths, maybe writings on other, these very different routes to
truth or to who we are, why we're here. God, great way to start the front row,
another deep conversation. I should say I particularly loved, the other stories
I loved, apart from yours, was Afterglow by Bidisha about a mad scientist on an
agenda from Putin to Rexxon and Adam Marek's end titles told in the form of an
episode of Desert Island Discs in which he reveals his lifelong rivalry with his
musician sister. Stephen Moffat, Lucy Caldwell, thank you both so much. The book
that they contributed to is called Collision, Stories from the Science of CERN
and it's out now. Now it was a best-selling 2016 book called The Immortal Life
of Henrietta Lacks that first drew international attention to the remarkable
true story of an African-American nurse who unknowingly became the source of
vital research into cancer. Cells from her cervical cancer tumour were taken and
used to create the so-called Heller line of cells that are still used in cancer
research. The book also inspired an HBO movie. Lacks, a nurse herself, died in
Baltimore in 1951, aged just 31. Now a new play at Coventry's Belgrade Theatre
by playwright Mojisola Adebayo draws a rich connection with the treatment of
other African-American women in the history of medical research, including the
notorious 19th century gynaecologist James Marion Sims, whose experiments on
enslaved black women without pain relief were captured in paintings. The play's
prologue gives us a taste of some of the main themes. It's about cancer and
capital. Capitalism as cancer. Cervical carcinoma in chicken culture and the
culture of chicken. Compost and recomposition. Giving of veins given in vain,
philosophising the threshold of black pain. Inhospitable hospitals. Monitored
monetary mortuaries, eugenic medical obscenities, Mississippi appendectomies and
the bad blood between us at Tuskegee. Not to mention sugar addiction,
affliction, disease, dis-ease, fibroids, obesity, HIV, vitamin D deficiency,
genes in genes, and cotton fields, cotton butts, cotton sheets, and the
unremembered history of gynaecology. Implements implications, dissecting
dissections, fertilising fertility, slash secret sterilisations. Speculums,
scalpels, swaps of women slaves. That was Amanita Francis as Henrietta Lacks.
The writer, Mojsola Adebayo, joins me now on the line from Berlin. With me in
the front row studio is the director, Matthew Zia. Welcome to you both. Can I
ask Mojsola first and then Matthew, how did the play come about? It came about
through a conversation that Matthew and I had where we were floating around
different ideas and thinking about women's bodies and black women's bodies and
seeds and life and death. I can't remember which one of us said, Matthew always
remembers, one of us said, have you heard of Henrietta Lacks? And the other one
said, I was just thinking about her. And so we decided to focus on the story of
Henrietta Lacks and then extend that out to other stories of extraction from
bodies and from the soil. Matthew. Yeah. So Mojsola and I were put together on a
National Theatre Connections project and just kind of immediately hit it off.
And like she says, we were kind of spiralling around all of these different
ideas that somehow Mojsola has managed to put into this play. I mean, I've read
a number of plays by Mojsola and I think she has this incredible ability to take
what seem like disparate ideas and bind them and wind them together so that you
end up with this kind of complete holistic experience. And obviously the story
of Henrietta Lacks is at the heart of the play. I mean, I've tried to summarise
what's the headline about her. What do we know about her that you wanted to
explore in the play? It was really the kind of magic and wonder of this idea of
human cells that keep multiplying, keep dividing outside of the human body and
that also have the capacity, her cells, these are healer cells taken from the
first two letters of her first name and her surname, and that these cells keep
multiplying, dividing, even as we're speaking, even as we're listening to this
programme, and that they have given rise to the greatest biological findings in
history, that every single person listening to this show has been affected by
her cells. What sort of discoveries? Polio vaccine, HIV treatment, IVF, what we
know about chromosomes. Yeah, Human Genome Project starts with her early
investigations into artificial intelligence. They blasted her into space, they
stuck her in nuclear blast, they fused her cells with a mouse. And the title,
Family Tree, obviously as Mojosele was saying, it kind of connects to a wider
picture. I'm interested both in what you were trying to do in terms of the story
you're telling, Mojosele, but also, Matthew, then in what we might see on stage.
Do you want to take the premise of the title first, Mojosele? Yeah, the premise
of the title, I think, is trying to, I suppose, connect all of these histories
of so many, in particular, women's stories that have been forgotten somehow, and
to connect them all, and to see them as all being interrelated. It also kind of
speaks to the theme of extraction. I'm also kind of obsessed with how to explore
environmental racism and climate change through other kinds of work that I'm
doing. So somehow I'm trying to connect climate and the climate catastrophe and
extraction from the soil and the wisdom of trees, really. So it's about a kind
of family, in a sense, of a collection of lives that are the characters in the
play, but also trying to connect that back to thinking about the soil. Matthew,
how would you describe, then, what we've created on stage in bringing this play
to life? Yeah, I mean, we've responded very much to what Mojosele has invited us
to create, which is this weird garden-like space where these souls reside. So in
our garden we have Henrietta Lacks, we have Anarkebetse and Lucy, who are the
three enslaved African-American women who you mentioned earlier. But we also
have three NHS workers, a contemporary storyline. At some points it feels like a
one-woman show with what Henrietta is doing, and then you have this kind of
split-screen action, but it feels really mystical and mythical. And the real
thing I'm excited about with this play, and to see how an audience responds to
it, I guess, is that it is full of pain and trauma, and as Mojosele describes it
in the opening statement, it is a true-life horror, but it is also full of magic
and wonder, and an exploration of women who were unwilling sacrifices, and yet
have created such a huge medical advancement and scientific advancement, and
that's the thing we really want to focus on, to celebrate these women and their
legacy and what they've given us. And as Mojosele says again, we all are here
today because of the sacrifice of these women. Yeah. I mentioned the painting of
that 19th century gynaecologist, and there are these images that exist that only
relatively recently we've started to look at in a different way and think, hang
on, these women were enslaved, they weren't given pain relief and so on. Matthew
mentioned that there is obviously a lot of trauma, but there's a lot of humour
as well. How did you find the balance in how these women would speak, what kind
of voice you give them? Because they say quite provocative things, don't they?
Yeah, there's definitely some challenging dialogue in the play, particularly
from the NHS nurses. Can you give an example of something that you feel you
could say without spoiling too much? There's a line, white people are called why
people, aren't they? I was trying to think of ways in which some of the
contemporary characters might think about race and think about their
positionality within all of that and the loss of their own lives and the kind of
disproportionate numbers of black and Asian folk that died during the pandemic
in terms of NHS nurses. So in terms of workers and think about how they might
speak about race and think about race. But being also the child of a white
person, I'm a person of mixed heritage, I know that even when you mention the
word white, it can lead to a very strong reaction in just friends and audience
members, family members, just the description of white. So I decided to take
that away and think about why, why people. And so it's really about, you know,
there's a whole kind of speech of that kind of questions. You know, why doesn't
anybody care if we disproportionately die? You know, why was Henrietta Lacks,
for example, renamed by scientists Helen Lane and Helen Larson to make her sound
more white? You know, why people, I talk about why people rather than white.
Matthew, there's a long history which is referred to in the play of African-
American men, as well as women being exploited by white medical researchers. And
we had a reference to that clip from the prologue to the Tuskegee study in the
1930s. Can you remind us about that and why it's part of this story? Yeah, I
think it is. It's worth saying that the Tuskegee syphilis experiment started in
the 1930s, but didn't stop until the 1970s and essentially a number of African-
American men were reporting having syphilis. And instead of treating them, the
medics at the time decided they wanted to watch and see how. It was a control
group. It was a control group. Yeah. And they wanted to see how, what syphilis
did to the body if left untreated. And so from 1930 to 1970, these men were
affected by syphilis. And I think for me, it comes back to the fundamental
question that is at the heart of this play, which is why have black bodies been
deemed more permeable by the medical industry than other bodies? Why are they
the control group? And of course, you know, there's an incredibly dark book
called Medica Apartheid, which has influenced some of the writing that Mojassera
has created. And it's I mean, we often talk about Mengele and the Nazi Party,
but this is just as horrific as that sort of material. So that's not a book
recommendation. Mojassera, you do include a white man in the cast and the
smoking man, the cast categories. What's his role in the play? And where did the
inspiration for this character come from? Inspiration really came from the fact
that Henrietta Lacks had been a tobacco farmer and she had descended from
enslaved Africans who were, yeah, essentially brought to America to farm
tobacco. And I was trying to think about whiteness rather than whiteness. Let me
think about that. And to think about how could I kind of present on stage this
idea of a very, very self-destructive whiteness that is inextricably linked to
the destruction of black life. How can I embody that in a way? How can I
symbolize that? And so I was kind of drawn to this figure of a kind of smoking,
rugged, 19th century. I'm seeing that image of the Marlboro Man cowboy that was
used to hang over Sunset Boulevard. Yeah, I didn't want to use the word Marlboro
to kind of give them any airplay, but just to kind of, that he kind of
emblemizes a kind of self-destruct. And it's actually inspired by an
extraordinary book called Dying of Whiteness by Jonathan Metzl, which looks at
the ways in which, and he's a white writer, looking at white Americans voting in
a sense for their own death. So, yes, inspired by dying of whiteness. Sorry, go
ahead, Matthew. I was going to say, you've given Henry the most beautiful line
about tobacco, which is what kind of people burn something that doesn't warm
you? And all these amazing ideas you're having to bring to life on stage,
Matthew. So the play jumps between past and present and there's water, soil and
even vegetables on stage. Vegetables, fire is very elemental as a play. Yeah.
And again, I think that's something that Mojito is really concerned with in her
writing, a kind of indigenous, symbiotic relationship with the earth and the
soil, as opposed to, as you've described, extraction and taking from, but not
replenishing. And the language in this play is so poetic. Again, even just in
that short extract we heard, it's almost like rap at times. You use similar
sounds of words, a lot of wordplay and they create such power. Have you always
been able to create that linguistic world or did you want to do something
different for this play? I think I've always been very influenced by hip hop and
perhaps that's one of the ways in which Matthew and I also connect. I started as
a street rapper. It sounds a lot cooler than it really was because I was a
fundamentalist when we were just street rappers. But I think I still got that
sense of call and response and poetry in Family Tree and also other works that
are happening. So another one of my plays, Stars, is touring at the same time as
Family Tree. And that's also one kind of big, big poetic kind of wordplay and an
exploration of trying to make something beautiful out of the brutal, which for
me is hip hop. And it's also about women's bodies, isn't it? That's Stars.
That's Stars, yeah. Can I give it this as an appropriate summary? It's an
Afrofuturist fantasy about an old woman who goes into space in search of an
orgasm and deals with issues of FGM and nonconsensual surgery. Is that fair?
That's absolutely fair. That's so brilliant. And I was thinking, Matthew, you
previously directed a revival of Joe Penhall's Blue Orange, which is also a play
about the experience of a patient at the centre of an experiment. Is that just
something that a theme that you've unexpectedly found yourself drawn back to or
is it something you think about? No, I think it's something I think about. I
think being born in brown skin and living on planet Earth forces you to think
about that. So, yeah, it's something I return to, which is why is there a
disparity or discrepancy in the treatment of black patients? The one final
thought is there is humour as well as all the trauma. And I'm just fascinated by
how you release the tension between the two on stage. I mean, it's hilarious.
And often I would say the play is very deliberately using humour to break a
tense moment, but then very quickly following up with more facts, more
information. The most outlandish joke we can't repeat on the airwaves, I'm
afraid. So you have to come and find us to hear what that one is. Anything you'd
like to add about that mix of humour with the trauma? Yeah, I think, you know, I
mean, you know, a play like Stars, for example, you're like that kind of funny
byline of an older woman who goes into space in search of her own orgasm. And
I'm trying, you know, I use something like that to be able to really delve into
extremely painful subjects of non-consensual surgery and orgasmia, recovery from
trauma, inability to access one's own pleasure. And it's also about me as a
writer that I need to do that so that I can keep looking up and keep breathing
and not descend after I've written a play. So, you know, making a story that
that goes into space and is extended out from my reality is really important to
me. Looking up, that's what we... I love that we've come back to space and the
universe again. Mojisola Adebayo, Matthew Zia, thank you both. Family Trees at
the Belgrade Theatre in Coventry from March the 10th and it will be touring
around the country until June the 17th. Now, documentaries have become big
international entertainment over the past 20 years. Every so often we talk about
the impact of, say, fly on the wall filmmaking, which has been a phenomenon in
Britain since the 1970s. But in America, the rise of true crime podcasts has
fueled a never-ending whirlwind of films, fated on a festival circuit at places
like Sundance. And a new documentary, Subject, tries to put the spotlight on the
harm that can be done to traumatise survivors and the ethical dilemmas of such
filmmaking. One of the most compelling stories in the film is that of Margaret
Ratliff. Her father, Michael Peterson, was the subject of The Staircase after he
was charged with murdering his wife. For me, I wanted this because I am
absolutely innocent, but I didn't trust the judicial system. I wanted it filmed
from start to end. I was more comfortable with that. I think my family was
obviously a little bit more hesitant and standoffish until we realised they're
going to come every day. You're going to be a part of our lives and then you
almost become part of a reality show. It was about me. I was going through my
own crisis. I didn't really give thought to my children, how it might affect
them. In a way, we made a choice to be in the documentary, but my siblings and I
were so young that we kind of didn't have a choice. Margaret Ratliff and Michael
Peterson in subject and the co-director Camilla Hall joins me now. God, I'm
going to have to talk about that case in a moment. But first, what made you and
your co-director feel this film needed to be made? I think it really started
with this idea of just kind of what does it feel like to be on the other side of
the camera? I had come from print journalism and essentially the kind of rules
of engagement had seemed a lot clearer when I was a print reporter. And moving
into documentary filmmaking, especially independent filmmaking, it really felt
like the Wild West. There were really no clear ethical guidelines. There's a lot
of hustle, isn't there, about winning over your subject and then you're selling
the premise of it before you've got the money? Exactly. There's a lot of hustle.
There's a lot of challenge over resources. Everybody's kind of fighting to tell
these stories. There's a lot of competition. And I think within that space,
there's a real opportunity that just ethics go out the window. You looked back
at cases from a number of years, going all the way back to Hoop Dreams in 1994.
But this one I just played the clip of, The Staircase. It's a really big part of
your documentary. And I think from that clip, the audience can feel real unease
about the gap between the father's motivation and what impact happened for his
daughters, who were teenagers at the time. How did you come to choose that
story? So the whole film started with Margie. I actually had this idea of
looking into documentary film ethics and already had the title subject. And got
an email out of the blue from a mutual friend of Margie's. And essentially we
met in LA and I kind of said to her, look, I know this isn't what you were
thinking we were going to meet about. She was actually wanting to start working
in documentary. But we sat down and I said, look, I've had this idea. How do you
feel about being a part of this in some way, even if it's not on camera, just
advising. And she just, you know, she immediately just said, this is so
important. This is something so close to my heart. I really do want to be a part
of this project. And that's really where Subject was born. And I think it was
the fact that Margie was kind of a relatively similar age. We had things in
common that I really felt for the first time. Oh, my gosh, like that could have
been me. So when did the original documentary happen? How old was she? So she
was about 19 when I first started filming. So how many years have it been since
then? It's almost two decades of being on camera. Crucially, you obviously
described how you won her over. But with some of these subjects, I mean, there's
an interview with someone who was in the Finding Neverland documentary about
Michael Jackson. Many of these people have had terrible experiences, including
how ethically they were treated by filmmakers. How did you win over their
confidence? To you, another documentary maker? So that clip specifically is
actually an archive clip. So it's from the original film. But in general, I
mean, Margie was a great help. Margie Ratliff, essentially, she was the first
one to come on board. And then basically that really helped us to kind of gain
the trust of the other participants. So after we'd spoken with Margie, she came
with us on our first shoot. And from there we started to film with Jesse from
Capturing the Freedmen and Lisa. And then you should say Jesse's father was
convicted of child abuse and he was initially convicted himself. So he was also
in prison. Yeah. Another compelling interview in subject is the young Egyptian
filmmaker, Ahmed Hassan, who is filming in Tahrir Square during the Arab
uprisings for The Square, which was nominated for an Oscar. In this clip, he
contrasts celebratory interest on the American festival circuit with the
attitude of the Egyptian authorities. Let's have a listen. The Egyptian media,
when they wake up and they find that the Egyptian film that had been Oscar
nominated, they get shocked. Like people are talking to me from every single
channel and they're telling me, you have to come to our channel, talk about your
film. You are the hero of The Square film. So how much money you want? What
time? We're going to send you a car. We're going to do, we're going to do, we're
going to do. And after, when they watch the film, that's have been released in
Netflix and some Egyptian guy put his camera in front of the computer and he
filmed my film and he uploaded it on Facebook. When the regime watch it,
everything is a change. Ahmed Hassan, it feels like for international subjects
like him, there's so many greater risks. We're seeing even more now with all
these things unfolding in Eastern Europe. How did you come across him and why
was he, I mean, he was so obviously an important part of this story. So the film
in itself is kind of a love letter to our community. Like these are films that
we loved or it kind of impacted us in some way. And I'd spent a lot of time in
Egypt in my early twenties. And I love that film. The Square really kind of made
this impression on me. And he's just such a magnetic character in that film.
It's a complicated story to tell, but he just, you really experience it through
him. And so really we just reached out on social media, started a conversation.
I think we had a lot of, we had an immediate connection and it went from there.
But I think what you said is, it was so important to us to include that in the
film. I mean, one of the things, and I think it's right to talk about it, if you
don't mind, but by the end of the film, he sold his camera, despite being the
most exciting filmmaker in the whole documentary. What's his situation now? So
actually through... He lives in Turkey now, doesn't he? So well, through the
premiere at Tribeca, through our kind of celebration in the US, we were actually
able to get him to the US. So he's actually living in New York at the moment and
he has just applied for his visa so he can work and live in the US. And yeah, I
mean, I spoke with him today. We're in very regular contact. Tell him we're
looking forward to speaking to him on the front row when he's made his next
film. That would be amazing. Did you have a worry at all about exploiting your
subjects? Because obviously a lot of them are delving back into traumas by
having to relive it for you. Definitely. I mean, we took a few measures on
subject that were quite specific. So we had an executive producer, Dr. Camila
Rashad, who's a trained psychologist, a doctor of psychology. So she was there
to support the co-producer participants from kind of day one and essentially
help them navigate any difficult kind of twists and turns that may come up on
the film. But essentially we did reach a conclusion with all of them that it was
impossible to completely avoid retraumatization. So what we tried to do with
them is really minimize it as much as possible. Some filmmakers, you interview
other filmmakers in the documentary, feel there needs to be a kind of code of
conduct that people sign up to for documentary makers. How close have you got to
coming up with one? Are there a few kind of key things that emerged for you? So
there's been a lot of work on this before our film, and there's a group called
the Documentary Accountability Working Group, which is based in the US. And
they've already created a framework that's actually online and you can access
it. And that has launched kind of alongside the film at the same time, which has
been amazing. So we can kind of point people to that as a resource. And I think
one of the things I love about it so much is that very initial phase before you
even turn on the camera, which is just this period of reflection where you
really kind of interrogate if you're the right person to tell this story, what
harm could be created by telling this story and really looking around your team
and figuring out, you know, who can best support me in this process. But then
you come back to this issue of who gets funding and the big names get funding
and the big names tend to be male and maybe certain backgrounds and all the rest
of it. Yeah, I mean, that still is the status quo. But I think there are people
within the documentary community, the community that are trying to change that,
whether it's opening up new access to funding or people who have that power and
privilege actually supporting others and helping them to thrive in the industry
as well. I want to come back to the staircase family because there's two things.
I hadn't watched this documentary, but not only did the father have a
relationship with the editor of the staircase, which just seems like an obvious
ethical line to cross, but the daughter Margie, we heard that she's stuck in the
very difficult situation of a new HBO drama series being created. So a six part
drama about the staircase starring Colin Firth, no less as her dad, and then the
actress is playing her wanting to talk to her to help her get into her role. It
just felt like being trapped in a nightmare. What plight is she in? What's
happened with that series? I mean, the series has been released. You know, it's
been very popular. It's been on billboards all over L.A., which she had to see
and kind of drive past. And, you know, she feels, I think, just very hurt and
just really fed up that just like, when does it end? And I think for her at the
very start of filming the staircase, Netflix didn't exist. You know, these
companies literally didn't exist. It was, you know, nearly two decades ago. And
so the kind of environment that we're kind of dealing with now is so different.
To be fair, we've had a big debate about this in Britain recently, is the
trouble also the public, the appetite for these kinds of programs, a lot of
concern about opening up old cases when you have no proof that someone was
wrongly imprisoned and the trauma it causes to victims, the families. So the
demand for true crime is huge. And, you know, there's a lot of feeding the beast
in that sense as well. And so actually one of the things that's come out from
our Q&As is this idea of kind of a shift towards conscious consumption. So, you
know, we think about what we eat, we think about what we wear. Why aren't we
thinking more about what we're consuming in terms of documentary and binging
these shows? And, yeah, we're starting to see audiences really ask questions and
be interested to know more and challenging their own decisions. What are you
going to do next after making a subject about subjects? Well, we have a
production company, so we're really kind of trying to apply all of the ideas and
themes that we brought into subject into Lady and Bird, our new production
company. So we have a lot of stories and ideas that we're working on. Fantastic.
Camille Hall, thank you. Subject is in cinemas now, Certificate 15. And this
Wednesday on Front Row, Nick Ahad will be hearing about the duty of care that
publishers and literary agents have to memoirists. Tomorrow on Front Row, Guys
and Dolls, Daniel Mays tells me about playing Nathan Detroit in a new immersive
production. And Carolyn Atkinson investigates how accessible theatres and gig
venues are for performers. Join me again at 7.15. Front Row was presented by
Samira Ahmed and the producer was Ellie Ann Glazer with studio engineer Michael
Millan. On BBC Radio 4. This service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.
Beginning on Saturday afternoon at 3.