TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at six o'clock. This is Alan Smith. Good evening. MPs investigating
statements Boris Johnson made about lockdown parties say he may have misled the
Commons repeatedly. His critics claim the evidence is damning. It's pretty clear
that he knew that he was misleading Parliament and he's lied about knowing that
he misled Parliament. He's still doing it. But the former Prime Minister
believes the MPs have cleared him of wrongdoing. The committee have produced a
report which totally vindicates me because there is no evidence that when I
stood up in Parliament I said anything that I did not believe. The Chancellor is
expected to extend government help for households with their fuel bills for a
further three months. Two of the biggest health unions have called off planned
ambulance strikes in England and Wales next week after the government agreed to
discuss pay for this year. A court in Belarus has handed down a 10-year prison
sentence to a pro-democracy activist who won the Nobel Peace Prize. Also
tonight, the cost of a first-class stamp rises to over a pound and a final Radio
2 farewell from Ken Bruce. The cross-party committee of MPs that's investigating
whether Boris Johnson misled the Commons over government lockdown parties has
said the evidence indicates he may have done so on four occasions. The MPs have
published an interim report setting out their findings so far before they
questioned the former Prime Minister later this month. Mr Johnson insisted it
was clear from the report that he had not committed any contempt of Parliament.
He also said people might view Sue Gray's investigation into what happened to
Boris Johnson into whitehall rule-breaking in a different light. Now the former
civil servant has been offered a job by Labour. Here's our political
correspondent David Wallace-Lockhart. The Privileges Committee is looking into
accusations that Boris Johnson misled the House of Commons when he assured MPs
that all Covid rules were followed in Downing Street during the pandemic. In an
update today, the committee said there was evidence that MPs may have been
misled on a number of occasions and that the evidence strongly suggests that
Covid breaches would have been obvious to Mr Johnson when he attended certain
events. Critics, including the leader of the Liberal Democrats, Sir Ed Davey,
want to see the former Prime Minister face consequences. No one is going to be
surprised that Boris Johnson knew he was lying. It's pretty clear that he knew
that he was misleading Parliament and he's lied about knowing that he misled
Parliament. He's still doing it. This is a person who doesn't know the truth and
frankly I hope the full penalties and sanctions of Parliament are put upon him
for having misled the country. But Mr Johnson insists the committee hasn't seen
anything that shows he knew rules were being broken and therefore he's
vindicated. I didn't mislead the House and I believe that what we were doing was
within the rules. That's why I said what I said to Parliament and I think what's
so interesting about the report today is that after 10 months of effort they
found absolutely no evidence to suggest otherwise. One investigation into
Partygate was undertaken by the former civil servant Sue Gray who is in the
process of accepting a job as Chief of Staff to the Labour leader Sir Keir
Starmer. She found multiple breaches of Covid rules within government and
described failures of leadership and judgment at Number 10 and the Cabinet
Office. Boris Johnson said that people could draw their own conclusions about
her motives when she wrote her report. People will make up their own minds about
this and I think that if you told me at the time I commissioned Sue Gray all the
stuff that I now know I might have invited her to reflect on whether she was
really the the right person to do it. Sir Keir Starmer said the evidence against
Boris Johnson was damning. He defended the conduct of Sue Gray and stressed she
was the kind of public service he wanted in his corner. As we look forward I
hope we can change from this failure of the last 13 years to an incoming Labour
government and in that I'm delighted that really strong professional respected
individuals are now wanting to be part of that future. The investigation into
Boris Johnson's comments in Parliament has yet to reach its final conclusions.
The former Prime Minister is expected to give evidence later this month. The
Chancellor Jeremy Hunt is expected to extend government support for household
energy bills in England, Scotland and Wales for a further three months. Typical
home energy costs had been due to rise to £3,000 a year from April but they're
now likely to stay at around £2,500. A separate rebate scheme is ending. Here's
our business editor Simon Jack. The energy price guarantee has seen the
government subsidise the cost of gas and electricity so that a household with
average usage pays £2,500 a year. Plans to scale back that support and let bills
rise to £3,000 are expected to be shelved and as the BBC revealed energy
companies are preparing customers bills for April assuming there will be no
increase. Charities and consumer campaigners have welcomed the expected move as
they have argued allowing bills to rise in under a month could have dire
consequences. Martin Lewis is the founder of the money saving expert website.
It's not good for individuals to put prices up, it's not good for people's
mental health, it's not good for consumer confidence which means it's bad for
business and it would also keep the inflation rate down if we don't put prices
up. It's a bit of a no-brainer. Prices will still rise for most households as a
£400 discount that was paid in monthly instalments from October is expected to
be phased out. A big factor in the government's change of heart is a sharp fall
in the price of wholesale gas. When the price guarantee was announced in
September last year prices were breaking records during a worldwide scramble for
energy as Russian supplies were shunned or shut off. With prices 70% or so lower
now the Treasury has spent tens of billions of pounds less on subsidies than it
originally thought it would and it hopes that by July it won't have to subsidise
bills at all as experts predict the average cost for households will drop
beneath £2,500 a year. Two of the biggest health unions have called off
ambulance strikes planned for next week in England and Wales after agreeing to
fresh talks about pay. The negotiations will include health unions, employers,
NHS officials and the governments in England and Wales. But another union,
Unite, which represents 4,000 ambulance workers has rejected the offer as our
health correspondent Dominic Hughes explains. The main unions that represent
health workers including the GMB and Unison as well as the Royal Colleges of
Nursing and Midwives have spent much of the day consulting their members and
each other on whether to accept an offer of fresh negotiations. What are
described as intensive talks will start early next week on the understanding
there will be an offer of fresh money for this year's pay award as well as new
money for next year. Strikes by GMB and Unison ambulance and other health
workers scheduled for next week as well as action planned by members of the
Charter Society of Physiotherapy have now been paused. Unite, the smallest of
the three ambulance unions, said its strike on March 6th would still go ahead as
planned, describing government preconditions for talks as unreasonable. But this
could be the beginning of a breakthrough that sees an end to a dispute that has
rumbled on since December and has seen the appointments of tens of thousands of
patients disrupted. But much will depend on what ministers can bring to the
table and what the unions think their members will accept. A court in Belarus
has sentenced last year's Nobel Peace Prize winner to 10 years in prison. Alice
Bialiatsky, who's 60, was convicted of smuggling money into the country and
financing the protest group he founded, charges which he denied. He was arrested
in 2021 after mass demonstrations took place following the presidential election
in which Alexander Lukashenko secured his sixth term in office. Our Russia
editor Steve Rosenberg has been following the story. Mr Bialiatsky is the
founder of Vyasta, a leading human rights organization in Belarus. His deputy,
Valiantin Stefanovich, was on trial with him. He was jailed for nine years. An
activist Oleg Zemelabkovich was handed a seven-year prison term. They were found
guilty of economic crimes and of funding protests. The case against them is
widely seen as politically motivated. Vyasta has been monitoring and documenting
human rights abuses in Belarus, as the country's authoritarian leader Alexander
Lukashenko has been suppressing dissent and cracking down on civil society.
According to Vyasta, there are currently 1,458 political prisoners in Belarus.
The Belarusian authorities claim there are none. A man and a woman have been
remanded in custody after appearing in court charged with the manslaughter of a
baby. The remains of the child, named in court papers as Victoria, were found in
a shed in East Sussex earlier this week. Mark Gordon and Constance Martin will
appear at the Old Bailey later this month. Our correspondent Duncan Kennedy
reports from Crawley Magistrates Court. Mark Gordon and Constance Martin were
brought into the courtroom, both dressed in grey tracksuits. A court official
asked them to give their names and dates of birth. Both also said they were of
no fixed abode. The three charges against them were then read out. They are of
manslaughter, concealing the birth of a child and perverting the course of
justice. The two defendants were not asked to enter a plea to any of the
charges. The court was told that the remains of the baby were found in a locked
shed. They were inside a plastic bag under some nappies. Court documents gave
the name of the baby as Victoria. Constance Martin and Mark Gordon were remanded
in custody and will next appear at the Old Bailey in London at the end of this
month. The former England cricket captain Michael Vaughan has denied allegations
he made racist comments towards the former Yorkshire player Azeem Rafiq. The
pundit and broadcaster has been giving evidence to the Cricket Discipline
Commission, which is investigating claims of racism at Yorkshire County Cricket
Club. Our sports editor Dan Roan was at the hearing. Michael Vaughan returned to
a disciplinary hearing today as the former England captain began his defence
against an ECB charge over an alleged racist comment his ex-Yorkshire teammate
Azeem Rafiq claims he made before a match in 2009. Rafiq alleges that Vaughan
said, too many of you lot, we need to have a word about that to him and three
other Asian players. Vaughan, who denies the claim, agreed such a comment would
be unacceptable but that it was inconceivable that he'd said the words because
it would have risked affecting his teammate's performance. I have a very clear
mind, he said, that I know I didn't say the words I've been alleged to have
said. I can't apologise for something I don't recollect saying. He added the
scandal had been a terrible look for the game. Jane Mulcahy, KC, counsel for the
ECB, asked Vaughan about some historical tweets he'd posted, including one about
the lack of English people in London and for which he'd previously apologised,
suggesting they were evidence of his views. He accepted they were disgusting and
said he'd taken an online diversity course to educate himself. Earlier,
Vaughan's lawyer, Chris Stoner, KC, had questioned the thoroughness of the ECB's
investigation, saying it had made assumption after assumption in the decision to
charge his client. The hearing will continue next week. One of the country's
leading scientific organisations is warning that British science will be deeply
damaged if the UK doesn't rejoin the European Horizon research programme as soon
as possible. There have been reports that Rishi Sunak is looking at other
options other than a full return to the £84bn programme run by the European
Commission. The President of the Royal Society, Professor Sir Adrian Smith, has
been speaking to our science correspondent, Pallab Ghosh. Horizon is a
collaborative research programme involving Europe's leading research institutes
and high-tech companies. The UK's membership of it has been held up because of
the dispute over the Northern Ireland Protocol. Last week, the European
Commission President, Ursula von der Leyen, said work on the UK's association
could begin immediately once a Windsor framework had been implemented. But
standing alongside her, Rishi Sunak remained silent and again ducked a question
on the issue from one of his own MPs at Prime Minister's Questions this week.
BBC News now understands that the Prime Minister is considering proposals to
renegotiate a cut-down version of Horizon. The idea is to sign up to parts of
the programme that appeal to the government and use the remainder of the money
on a UK-led alternative to Horizon called Plan B. But the President of the Royal
Society, Professor Adrian Smith, said any further delay in fully joining
Europe's premier research programme would damage UK science. All history
suggests that that kind of cherry-picking and negotiating is not up for grabs
and not simple. It will mean that the continuing uncertainty and lack of full
association will drift on. And the longer it drifts on, the more we have the
problems we're already seeing with sort of brain train being excluded from
leadership in major programmes. Professor Smith's comments reflect overwhelming,
if not universal, support from the research community for Britain to take up the
offer to rejoin the whole Horizon programme that's currently on the table. The
price of a first-class stamp is set to rise above £1 for the first time. Royal
Mail says the cost will increase by 15p next month to £1.10. Here's our business
correspondent Emma Simpson. Royal Mail said it recognised that many households
were facing challenging times, but the changes were necessary because of the
increasing costs of delivering posts six days a week for a universal price
across the UK. It's also facing a 25% drop in the amount of letters being sent
since the pandemic. The business is losing about £1m a day. It's been hit by a
wave of strike action in a long-running and costly dispute with a communication
workers' union over pay and conditions. But the rise has been criticised by
Citizens Advice, who said the price of a first-class stamp had increased by 64%
in five years, and nobody should be paying more for what it described as a
subpar service, where millions had missed important letters as a result of
postal delays. You're listening to the 6 o'clock news on BBC Radio 4. The main
news so far, a parliamentary committee says there's evidence Boris Johnson may
have misled MPs four times about lockdown parties in Downing Street. The
Chancellor is expected to extend the government's energy support scheme for
households for another three months. Still to come... I actually wrote him a
letter and I said if it never happens it would be such a failure on all of our
part and he just called up and said yes. Glastonbury unveils its headline acts.
A prominent local lawyer in the US state of South Carolina has been given two
consecutive life sentences for killing his wife and son. The murders in June
2021 were part of a series of suspicious deaths that have been connected to the
family and the case has fuelled huge media interest. Alex Murdoch is also facing
multiple further charges for alleged financial crimes. Here's our Washington
correspondent Gary O'Donoghue. This is the fall of a dynasty, it's a fall from
grace. I do believe that Alex Murdoch would kill Paula Maggie. This gruesome
family tragedy has already spawned two separate television miniseries. For
decades the Murdochs have held key prosecutor roles in several counties and
their private law firm was regarded as almost as powerful as law enforcement
itself. But two years ago with financial pressures mounting Alex Murdoch
brutally murdered his wife and son on their 1700 acre property. During
sentencing Judge Clifton Newman strongly suggested he'd be imposing a death
penalty if prosecutors hadn't taken it off the table. Murdoch remained defiant.
I'm innocent, I would never under any circumstances hurt my wife Maggie and I
would never under any circumstances hurt my wife Maggie and I would never under
any circumstances hurt my son Paul. The prosecution said Murdoch committed the
murders in an attempt to generate sympathy at a time when his life was falling
apart with allegations that he'd stolen huge sums from clients partly to feed a
drug habit. What fatally undermined Murdoch's case was that he had to admit he'd
lied about the last time he'd seen his wife and son alive. That emerged in
dramatic fashion when a video from his dead son's phone taken minutes before the
murders was played to the court with Murdoch's voice clearly on it. The
fascination with the case has captivated a nation already enthralled to the true
crime genre. That has all been infinitely magnified by televised court
proceedings and the substantial latitude for comment and discussion of ongoing
criminal matters afforded by American law. A woman in Belgium who murdered her
five children has been killed at her own request. Genevieve Lermid's lawyer said
his client had chosen to die on the 16th anniversary of the crime. Our Europe
correspondent Jessica Parker reports from Belgium. It was a case that shocked
the country. In 2007, while the children's father was away, Genevieve Lermid
murdered her son and four daughters in Nivelles, an area south of Brussels. She
then tried and failed to take her own life and ended up calling the emergency
services. She was sentenced to life in prison before being moved to a
psychiatric hospital in 2019. Now aged 56, it's emerged that Genevieve Lermid
died earlier this week, exactly 16 years on from the crime. Belgian law allows
people to choose to be euthanised under certain circumstances, including if
they're in a condition of constant and unbearable suffering, either mental or
physical, that cannot be alleviated. The authorities say nearly 3,000 people
died through euthanasia in Belgium last year, with cancer the most common
reason. The UK has dismissed fresh calls from Argentina to open negotiations
about the sovereignty of the Falkland Islands. The Argentine government made the
demand after it withdrew from an economic agreement with the UK at a meeting
yesterday of the G20 group of nations. The dispute about the British overseas
territory in the South Atlantic continues to strain relations between the UK and
Argentina, 41 years after they went to war over the islands. Here's our
diplomatic correspondent Paul Adams. The Falklands issue is never far from the
surface when British and Argentine ministers meet, but officials say they were
surprised when it dominated yesterday's talks in Delhi. Argentina's foreign
minister, Santiago Cafiero, said his government no longer wanted to abide by a
2016 agreement in which the two governments set aside their differences over the
Falklands in order to improve relations on trade, security and other issues. In
a series of tweets, Mr Cafiero said his government wanted fresh negotiations
over the future of the islands, which Argentina calls Las Malvinas. Mr
Cleveley's response was a polite but firm rebuff. In his own tweet, he said the
Falkland Islands were British and the islanders had chosen to remain a self-
governing UK overseas territory. It's not clear quite why Argentina has chosen
this moment to take a tougher stance, but the issue which drove the two
countries to war 41 years ago remains highly emotive in Argentina, and in seven
months' time the country goes to the polls to elect a new president. The reality
TV personality Stephen Bear has been jailed for 21 months by a judge at
Chelmsford Crown Court for posting video footage of him having sex with his ex-
girlfriend Georgia Harrison on an adult website. Ms Harrison, who's appeared on
programmes including The Only Way Is Essex, said she welcomed the sentence. Our
correspondent Frances Reid reports. Stephen Bear gained a level of fame from
first appearing on the reality show Shipwrecked, then going on to win Celebrity
Big Brother in 2016. In 2020, the 33-year-old posted a private video of him
having sex with his former girlfriend Georgia Harrison on OnlyFans, a site where
users can pay to watch adult content. Ms Harrison, who has appeared on TV shows
like Love Island, says she had no idea she was being recorded by Bear's CCTV.
She subsequently asked him not to share the footage. He was found guilty of
voyeurism, as well as of disclosing private sexual photographs and films with
intent to cause distress. He was also given a restraining order to not contact
Ms Harrison for five years. She waived her right to anonymity and spoke to
reporters outside the court. I hope that this puts anyone off committing this
sort of crime, and I hope for anyone else who's been victim of it, it gives them
some sort of justice. Intimate image abuse, also known as revenge porn, has been
an offence in the UK since October 2015. The term relates to sharing intimate
videos of someone without their consent for the purpose of causing distress. The
domestic abuse charity Refuge says one in seven women receives threats to share
intimate images, many are from ex-partners. Ruth Davison is its CEO. This is a
good but unfortunately unusual outcome in this case today. The victim shaming
and the minimisation of this kind of crime I think prevents even more women from
coming forward. Campaigners say there should now be tighter restrictions from
tech companies and tougher laws to reduce the number of women who experience
such online abuse. The King and Queen consort are to travel to France and
Germany later this month on their first state visits. During the six-day trip,
the King will become the first British monarch to address politicians at the
German parliament building, the Bundestag, and the first to deliver a speech to
French politicians in the Senate chamber in Paris. The Cambridge-based
technology firm Arm has dealt a blow to UK markets by announcing it will only
seek a listing on the US stock exchange. Rishi Sunak was among those trying to
persuade the Japanese-owned company, which designs chips for smartphones, to
list in London. As our economics editor Faisal Islam explains, there are fears
it's part of a damaging trend. The decision by Arm Holdings' current owners is a
double blow to the government's economic efforts as it sits at the heart of two
priority sectors, finance and technology. The firm is a world-beating technology
company founded in Cambridge, which was snapped up in 2016 by a top Japanese
fund, SoftBank, at the time the sale was waved through by the government despite
some concern about the loss of one of British tech's crown jewels. Its decision
to list on the US stock market rather than back in London is down to a number of
factors, one of which is long-standing changes to the behaviours of big British
pension and insurance funds, which have reduced their interest in buying British
shares. US markets also value some companies in certain sectors, such as tech
and infrastructure, more highly than in the UK. Firms such as Arm can place
themselves in a much bigger shop window for investors by listing their shares in
New York rather than in London. Some tech flotations have flopped here in the
UK. The company has committed to maintain its tech and headquarters in the UK
and is opening a new facility in Bristol. But the microchip sector is
increasingly strategically important to the world's major economic blocs, and
Arm Holdings has much-coveted technology used in Apple and Samsung products. A
long-awaited government strategy for the sector is yet to be published. In the
city, the 100-share index ended the day up three points at 7,947. On Wall Street
a short time ago, the Dow Jones was up 232 points at 33,235. On the currency
markets, the pound is trading at $1.20.1 and against the euro, sterling is at
1.13 euros, which makes a euro worth 88.5 pence. Cricket and England have beaten
Bangladesh by 132 runs in the second one-day international, meaning they have
clinched the three-match series with a game to spare. Jason Roy scored a century
as England reached 326 for seven in Mirpur. Bangladesh were all out for 194.
There were four wickets each for Sam Curran and Adil Rashid. Nicholas Snowman, a
leading figure in the British and French arts scenes, has died at the age of 78.
He was a co-founder of the London Sinfonietta and was the General Director of
the Southbank Centre for more than 10 years from 1986. Nicholas Snowman went on
to be the head of Glyndebourne Festival Opera before moving to France. The
Telegraph once described him as one of the most influential figures in British
classical music for the past 30 years. He told Sue Lawley on Desert Island Discs
in 1990, during his time at the Southbank Centre, that he welcomed whatever the
next chapter may be. I've always been very, very fascinated by music. My parents
don't play instruments, but I was always encouraged to go to concerts and
exhibitions and music was very much part of our life. I do have a great love of
opera, I always have had. I don't feel any sense of pressure or any great
ambition I'm waiting to fulfil. I'm enjoying what I'm doing at the moment and
I'm determined. Ken Bruce has presented his final show at the Southbank Centre.
Bruce has presented his final show on BBC Radio 2. He started at the station in
1984 and made his mid-morning programme the most listened to radio show in the
UK. Signing off, he said the BBC was still the finest broadcasting corporation
in the world, aside from what he called the occasional vagary. He went on to
thank his listeners. A lot of people would say, oh write down a big speech and
deliver it. That's not the sort of thing I do. I do really just want to say
thank you to everybody who has contributed in any, any small way to this
programme, particularly the listeners. I really couldn't do it without listeners
who contribute and complete the dialogue. We talk to each other on a daily basis
and I hope maybe sometime in the future we may be able to continue doing that.
Arctic Monkeys and Guns and Roses have been revealed as headline acts for this
year's Glastonbury Festival. Organisers had already announced that Sir Elton
John would top the bill on the third day of the event as part of his farewell
tour. Our music correspondent Mark Savage has been looking at the line-up. This
will be Guns and Roses' debut at Glastonbury and Arctic Monkeys' third time as
headliners. But the biggest attraction is bound to be Elton John in what could
be his last ever UK show. Organiser Emily Evis says she made a personal approach
to get him to play. I actually wrote him a letter and I said if it never happens
it would be such a failure on all of our parts and he just called up and said
yes. All three of this year's headliners are male artists, an awkward position
for a festival that's pledged to achieve gender balance across its line-up.
Culture writer Hannah Ewans says it reflects a wider problem. The music
industry, particularly the British music industry, just doesn't support female
artists in the way they need to be supported. I think there's just not that kind
of nurturing that takes artists from pretty exciting three-year career into
those kind of legacy acts. In the UK, only 20% of the artists signed to record
labels are female. At Glastonbury, representation is much higher, at 48%. We
obviously aim for 50-50. Some years it's more, some years it's less. I mean,
next year it's looking like we've got two female headliners. This year we did
have one and she unfortunately had to pull out. And there are female acts
getting big slots. The US pop star Lizzo will play immediately before Guns N'
Roses. And Lana Del Rey will headline the festival's second biggest stage on
Saturday night. Glastonbury opens its gates on Wednesday 21st June. The
headlines again. MPs investigating statements Boris Johnson made about lockdown
parties say he may have misled the Commons. Mr Johnson says there's no evidence
he committed any contempt of Parliament. The Chancellor is expected to extend
government support for household energy bills for a further three months beyond
April. Two health unions have scrapped planned ambulance strikes in England and
Wales next week after the government agreed to talks about this year's pay
award. A Nobel Peace Prize winner has been given a 10-year prison sentence in
Belarus after being arrested at a pro-democracy demonstration. The former
England cricket captain Michael Vaughan has denied making a racist comment to
Asian teammates while playing for Yorkshire in 2009. And the price of a first-
class stamp is to rise to £1.10. BBC News. And the news this evening was read by
Alan Smith. And there's a wry look back at the week's news when Angela May was
asked about the UK's future. And there's a wry look back at the week's news when
Andy Zaltzman takes the chair for tonight's news quiz next. And later at 8
o'clock, more serious political debate in Any Questions, which tonight comes
from one of the oldest working men's clubs in the UK in Leeds. And that's
followed by a point of view when Al Kennedy finds echoes of the disaster movies
of her childhood, in particular Jaws. And whenever there's a problem, greedy
people will ignore it. That's tonight in a point of view at 10 to 9. Now on
Radio 4. It's Monday, 9am, and it's the news quiz's turn to use the BBC's magic
lamp this week. Hello, Andy. What's your wish? Oh, three wishes. One, world
peace. Two, unlimited cucumbers for all. And what will I have for three? Oh,
Matt Hancock back in the news, please. You can only have one. Only one?
Shortages, mate. Oh, right, fair enough. Well, I've got a topical comedy show to
do, so Hancock, please. Your call. Thanks, G. Welcome to a new edition of
Hancock's Half... Oh, sorry, the News Quiz! Hello, I'm Andy Zaltzman. Quick
apology, the script for this week's show, which of course we write exclusively
on WhatsApp, was unfortunately leaked in advance. Which is how the audience knew
they were supposed to laugh in that gap. Worked out all right, didn't it? Our
teams this week, we have Team National Interest against Team Massive Betrayal.
Let's shorten those down to Team Potato against Team Potato. On Team Potato, we
have Alistair Beckett-King and Simon Evans. And the Potatoes this week, Samira
Ahmed and Felicity Ward. Our first question goes to Samira and Felicity. Which
already-mentioned former Health Secretary and celebrity wild animals genitals
consumer might now regret indulging in the modern fad of a This is a really hard
one, Andy. I mean, I'm not from here, but I'm going to say Matt Hancock, is that
correct? Yes, Team Potato. The WhatsApp messages. The thing that gets me is he
shared them with Isabel Oakeshott, who, if anyone remembers when Vicky Price and
Chris Hulme, it turned out that she'd taken points for his driving offence. And
we know that she'd shared the story with Isabel Oakeshott, who gave all the
information to the police. But there is this big golden rule, and even if you
think lots of journalists don't follow them, there is a rule that journalists
are supposed to protect the confidentiality of their sources. And everyone knows
that she didn't. So the idea that you'd give all your WhatsApp messages is quite
interesting. WhatsApp is such a useful app, though, isn't it? Because all the
messages you share on WhatsApp are coded and encrypted and utterly unreadable by
any third party, unless you copy them out by hand and pass them over on a sheaf
of A4 to a woman who has proven to be an untrustworthy broadsheet scumbag. Could
be said to have delivered your own fate into your hands. It is so
skullduggerous. Like, she got the text while she was helping Matt write his
book. She signed an NDA, and then she's gone, oh, it's of public interest. Well,
let me tell you, Isabel, I am the public and I am interested. It is something
that I love. It's business that isn't mine. Like, what fresh, thick gossip is
this? There is no way you could get me to read Matt Hancock's book, not for a
million years. I will sit there and read 100,000 text messages of his, though.
It might be an interesting way of getting kids to do their revision, wouldn't
it? To actually just reformat the reign of Henry VIII into a series of
supposedly secret WhatsApp messages. That's basically what they did with the
Bible, wasn't it? That's how it all came out in little verses. It's fascinating
to me, seeing Matt Hancock being stabbed in the back by a serial backstabber.
What this situation puts me on my mind, have you ever seen a snake eating a rat?
It's very hard to know who to root for in that situation. I feel like I'm sort
of going, oh, poor Matt Hancock, and then I remember who Matt Hancock is. And
I'm like, go, Isabelle Oakeshott! And then I remember who Isabelle Oakeshott is.
It's a kind of revolting situation. I find myself finding sympathy for Matt
Hancock, because one of the revelations is that he was limiting the tests
against Chris Whitty's advice, but to be fair, at the time, there were a limited
number of tests, because half of them had gone to Jacob Rees-Mogg's kids. He's
got 400 of them, they hatch in the basement, they come out of eggs, it's a real
issue. So it's tough. And you say they hatch out of eggs, Jacob Rees-Mogg's
children, Fabergé eggs. There is also a bit of an agenda, because Isabelle
Oakeshott was very publicly anti-lockdown. So I think you need to read the whole
context of this story being splashed in the Daily Telegraph, which was very
anti-lockdown against that background. You need to read all three million words,
in fact, that have been shared before you can really form a valid opinion about
this. It's roughly three times the length of the King James Version Bible,
funnily enough. That's been given as the example of a thing that people might
have read and so think, oh, it's quite long then. That's a very useful metaphor.
You know, Matt Hancock said that stuff was taken out of context, it wasn't
complete. But actually, I think one of the joys is taking individual WhatsApp
and thinking, who's this about? So there's a couple I really like. There's one
which is, if only they had started working on this a fortnight ago. Is it
already in hardback, by the way? I'm telling him. But the best one was, he needs
a haircut and a holiday, and you think, who could that be? That's me. And then
you realise the rest of the sentence is somewhere other than Scarborough, and
you think, oh, it's not Boris Johnson, it's Gavin Williamson. Well, on the
subject of Gavin Williamson, in one of the leaked messages, and this question
could go to Simon and Alistair, the former Education Secretary... Hmm...those
words still don't make sense, do they? Gavin Williamson claimed that teachers
simply hate what? Children. Well, that was, I think, implied. They hate work.
Correct. And the reason they hate work is because they hate children, because
that is their job, after all. So it is, you're right, it is implied. But I think
you have to recognise the job has changed significantly, not just due to
lockdown and pandemics and masks and so on, especially for male teachers. You
can put on as many motivational ads as you like about, you know, the joy of
unlocking the curiosity and lighting little fires in a child's brain. Since the
end of corporal punishment and fat-shaming, it's just been no fun at all. Very
little appeal remains to a healthy, red-blooded male to spend his days with a
bunch of ingrate little scamps like that. That's part of the problem with where
we're headed at the moment. How are your children, by the way, Simon? But also,
the full quote, wasn't it, was, I know they really, really do just hate work.
That's what Gavin Williamson said about teachers, and you think, who was running
the Foreign Office during the Afghan evacuation? Where were they running it
from? Debt chairs on holiday, weren't they? I sympathise with the teaching
unions because I think teachers are heroes. Yeah. I mean, every teacher I've met
on an individual level has been awful, but... Nightmarish people, but as a
group, I regard them as heroes. And I don't envy people having to spend time
with kids. I was recently forced to hug a neighbour's child against my will, by
the child, obviously, not by a third party. And I'm always nervous doing that
because your smell can get on the child, and when they go home, the mother will
eat them. You know, the teachers do a wonderful job, but I do think we pay them
wrongly because they're paid an annual salary, whereas I think they should be
paid according to how much their pupils use the knowledge they've learnt from
them during the rest of their life. You know, just like 20 years on, if a
student correctly identifies an Oxbow Lake, they should send their old geography
teacher a tenner. OK, I think we all have, like, something that we wish we got
taught in school now that we're an adult. What would yours be? Mine is how to
clean a sieve. Because there's no way to clean a sieve, because you wash one
side and then it goes on the other side, and then you wash the other side, and
then you move it around with your hand, and if you've got an old sieve like me,
you cut your hand on the loose bits and you go, oh, I should get a new sieve,
but you don't, ever. And then you've just got a dirty sieve all the time. When
people say I've got a memory like a sieve, what they mean is you can't clean it.
So this claim that Isabella Oakshott made that she thinks the Covid inquiry is
going to be a colossal whitewash, do you share that concern? Well, her big
agenda is that there shouldn't have been lockdowns, and there are issues about
how extensive the lockdowns were, particularly around schools, but I just remain
really sceptical about the agenda behind releasing them now. Think how long
she's been sitting on them. Yeah, that's quite a lot of things to be sitting on
as well. That's a lot of things to be sitting on. 100,000 WhatsApp messages, and
to put that in context, that's equivalent to 1.3 days in a school parent's
WhatsApp group. LAUGHTER Or 0.7 days if someone's come into school with nits.
LAUGHTER In terms of what these 100,000 WhatsApp messages revealed, have we
learned anything unexpected from it? Oh, yeah, who does this apply to? He's from
the UK, and he's from the UK. He's freaking out. You can tell he isn't being
wholly rational. That narrows it down, doesn't it? LAUGHTER I was disappointed
by how dull their writing is. You know, I thought this will be an insight into
their minds, and their minds, I think, are unexciting to me. Like, he described
the teaching unions as a bunch of arses. Absolutely. Now, that's linguistically
inelegant, because you cannot bunch arses. LAUGHTER That's a terrible item.
Like, ask any florist, you can't... LAUGHTER At best, you can have a corsage of
arses. You cannot have a bunch. They also say an absolute bunch of arses. Like,
there's only one bunch of arses. Yes. Arses. A totality of arses. No, no, it was
a bunch of absolute arses, not an absolute bunch of arses. LAUGHTER Why else
this week, this can go to both teams, some people getting shirty with Matt
Hancock? Matt Hancock, the, at the time, Health Secretary, gave Chris Evans his
Newcastle football jersey to auction off to raise money for the NHS, which is
disgusting in itself. The man that could change the situation has said, here,
have a shirt, you people raise some money. And then, apparently, there is videos
that have come out where he's wearing that jersey again, and he said the person
said that he could take the jersey back. And then he also said, oh, Matt, why
don't you keep the money as well? And then... And then he said, oh, you should
kiss one of your aides during lockdown. Like, I mean... Matt's just doing it for
the NHS. I just want to interject here, I have been present at a few sort of
dinners where they have auctions and stuff. It is actually quite common for
people to buy them and then give them back because they don't actually want
them. They're basically going, I can afford to waste 1,500 quid on this
worthless artefact and then chuck... It's basically like you caught a seven-inch
trout and you'd get a quick selfie with it and then chuck it back in the river.
It is very plausible that the fella bought it and gave it back to Hancock. What
is tragic is he then wears it again. LAUGHTER Yes, it was quite an extraordinary
story. He was seen wearing a signed Newcastle United shirt that he had
supposedly auctioned off for charity, claimed that the person who won the
auction gave it back to him. It's also possible that the person who won the
auction sold it back to him as fully functional operating theatre-grade medical.
LAUGHTER Matt Hancock, not the only blast from the Covid past back in the news.
Sue Gray has been offered a job by the Labour Party. Sue Gray, who compiled the
report about Partygate. That was her, wasn't it? Well, I suppose it throws a bit
of a shadow across the even-handedness with which she might have conducted it,
whether they feel that they owe her a favour at this point, I don't know, for
looking the other way at Beergate or whatever, but it seems a fairly
extraordinary appointment, yeah. Being offered a job isn't the news, it's news
if she takes it. Yeah, that's fair enough. Offered a job as Chief of Staff. What
exactly does Chief of Staff involve for Keir Starmer? It's hard to know, isn't
it? I remember the fella who was the Chief of Staff in the West Wing. He was
quite important. His job was to stay at the office when everyone else had gone
and work quietly with one of those nice green-shaded lanterns on his desk. The
other main thing I remember about Sue Gray is that she triangulates the
character name and the actress name of Sue Ellen in Dallas, whose real name was
something grey. I remember that, and I could never get that out of my head
whenever she came on the news. I would hear JR going, I'm sorry, but I'm not
going to believe you when you're an unfit mother! LAUGHTER Well, yes, indeed,
Matt Hancock. Matt Hancock can breathe a sigh of relief. He will not, after all,
be most remembered for smooch-fondling his assistant during high lockdown, or
even for going on a TV celebrity pseudo-reality show and eating a camel's
dingle-dongle, a lady sheep's virginabelle, or even a cow's batholium sphinx-
stral. LAUGHTER Instead, he can rest easy knowing that history will recall him
and his 1,000 WhatsApp messages exchanged between him and senior government
officials at the height of the pandemic and lockdown to Isabel Oakshott, a
journalist known to be strongly critical of the government's lockdown strategy,
of which Hancock was a key and absolute plank. LAUGHTER At the end of that
initial round, the scores are four points all. APPLAUSE Elsewhere in Covidia,
this can go to Samira and Felicity, why were the world's bats and pangolins
demanding a strongly worded apology this week? LAUGHTER Because the FBI said
that they thought the source of Covid might be a leak from a lab in Wuhan. Even
the scientists said, you can't prove that, but it's out there now, it's not a
guess. You're saying we can't entirely trust the FBI? Basically, it's an
alternative fact. Right. I just think, obviously, it came from a lab. Why?
Because I've watched Contagion, Outbreak, Dawn of Planet of the Apes, Generation
Z... Wuhan MasterChef. LAUGHTER AND APPLAUSE This is the FBI director,
Christopher Wray. I want to give him his full name, Christopher Secret Death
Wray. LAUGHTER And, yeah, so it might not be true, they don't really have
evidence, but he said it, and we're playing a game of would I lie to you between
the Chinese Communist Party and the FBI. Two sort of ingenuous naifs who would
never mislead. I think it's nice to have the FBI come out in favour of a long-
standing conspiracy theory. That's what we've been waiting for. We're just lucky
he didn't get the wrong file and admit to assassinating JFK. LAUGHTER Yes, well,
everyone loves an origin story, whether it's about how superheroes acquired
their superpowers. You may not ask about The Flash. LAUGHTER How Jacob Rees-Mogg
was bitten by a radioactive antique harpsichord as a child. LAUGHTER Or where
world-fracturing pandemics originated. This week, the director of the FBI, the
number one ranked American federal law enforcement agency, claimed that Covid
most likely originated from a Chinese government-controlled lab. Many scientists
and other US government departments do not subscribe to the lab leak theory.
Other theories regarding the origin of the virus include a Greek woman called
Pandora opening a box that quite clearly said, do not open. LAUGHTER At the end
of our Covid round, Team Potato have 16, Team Potato have eight. APPLAUSE Our
next question could go to Simon and Alistair. Special, exciting and attractive.
What or whom was Rishi Sunak describing in such amorous terms? Obviously, Ursula
van der Leyen, who does look spectacular at 65 and with seven children. There's
got to be something to be said for Lutheranism, I think. LAUGHTER I think he was
actually referring to Northern Ireland's new status. He believes that it has
extraordinary potential in the future now because it has unique access both to
the EU, through its Irish border, and to the UK. It's in a really unique and
exciting position, a similar position, funnily enough, to the one England was in
shortly before... LAUGHTER AND APPLAUSE I think what I find interesting is this
agreement they've got about having two lanes, they're going to have a green and
a...? Green lane and a red lane. And a red lane. And the idea is that if stuff
is only going into Northern Ireland, it goes through the green lane, and then
no-one has any more checks on it. But if it's going on to the Republic, then it
has to go through the red lane. And, of course, no-one would falsely declare
anything going through the green lane. It's a fudge, which is what you need to
do. The solution was ultimately impossible that would have satisfied all the
rational expectations. So what you do is you create a fog of doubt, a miasma,
and this is what they've managed to do. And this is what the Good Friday
Agreement amounted to as well. The Good Friday Agreement was a fudge, which I
always thought was quite appropriate for an Easter treat. It's what you have to
do. You have to create, as you say, something where, obviously, you kind of go,
well, that's not going to work, but people have to believe it works. It's like
Tinkerbell, you know, and that's where you're... All there needs to be is the
goodwill to see it put to bed and we all move on, and that's where we're at now,
seven years on. The only thing with goodwill is they've introduced a mechanism,
haven't they, to allow representatives in the Northern Ireland Assembly to
object to any of the new rules that they don't like. And how long has it been
since Northern Ireland Assembly last sat? So, Rishi Sunak said that Northern
Ireland was the world's most exciting trade zone, which I think speaks of a
paucity of imagination. I can think of much more exciting zones, like a jungle
zone or a futuristic zone, a volcano level, an ice one where everything is
slippy. You know, it's just easier to come up with better zones. He said, those
trying to drag us back into the past will not succeed, and he was quite
passionate, and I was almost impressed for a second, but then I remembered
that's just how linear time works. LAUGHTER And kind of taking credit for it,
he's like, gravity will continue to apply throughout Northern Ireland, British
goods will not be floating off shelves. Thank you very much. I find that in
trying to understand this, the main sticking point for me has been the phrase
Northern Ireland Protocol, because it sounds really boring in my voice, but if
you say it in a bad impression of Liam Neeson, Northern Ireland Protocol, it's
much sexier. Like, I may not know what the Northern Ireland Protocol is, but I
will find out before I'm on the news quiz. LAUGHTER And I will still not
understand it. Final question on the Brexit negotiations. Crass and
controversial. These are not the Secret Service code names for the two Prime
Ministers who preceded Rishi Sunak. It is not the all-new podcast in which Piers
Morgan interviews himself. And it's not even the first review of the new
biography Florence Nightingale, Alien Sex God. LAUGHTER But they were words used
to describe who doing what with whom this week. Wasn't it King Charles II?
Third, third! Is he the third? It's not a great trilogy, because he dies at the
end of the first one, but then they bring him back. LAUGHTER It's having tea
with the king. Ursula von der Leyen. Yeah, Ursula von der Leyen had tea with the
king. And the DUP are very upset about this. They have said that it could
jeopardise the monarchy. I'm a Republican, but in the good sense, not in the
American kind of... BIP-BIP-BIP-BIP! I just don't like them! Not in that sense
of Republican. LAUGHTER But this is very... It's controversial because the
king's not supposed to be political. He's just the unelected head of state. He's
not political. You understand? He's just a famously interfering member of the
British royal family. He's just the Supreme Governor of the Church of England.
He's neutral. That's not a big deal. Anyone could be the Supreme Governor of the
Church of England if they tried hard enough. Supreme Governor is what a cockney
will call you if you give him your chips. It's not political. Come on. I think
he should probably have followed the Queen's lead. She set a great example. She
would probably not have met Ursula von der Leyen if it wasn't controversial. She
limited her encounters with visiting animated bears, for instance, when she
wanted to take tea. And that was considered a heart-warming gesture towards the
immigrant bear community without necessarily influencing legislation and so on.
It's a tightrope and she walked it well. LAUGHTER We never saw the full version
of that sketch with Paddington. They cut out the bit at the end where the last
words he said to her during that filming was, I'm not going to be able to do
this. LAUGHTER This was European Commissioner Ursula von der Leyen taking tea
with the King, deemed crass and controversial by some, because the King is
supposed to be politically neutral and because von der Leyen dunked a chocolate
hobnob in her cup of tea and then popped it behind her ear as one for later.
LAUGHTER But it has been a week in which Britain and the EU finally reached an
agreement intended to resolve one of the trickiest legacies of Brexit, which is
that Northern Ireland isn't in East Anglia, as had been previously thought.
LAUGHTER The new agreement, named the Windsor Framework in homage to the best-
selling motorcycle of the 1930s... LAUGHTER..includes a new series of measures
in the Northern Ireland Protocol that are intended to resolve the, shall we call
them, glitches latent in Boris Johnson's Brexit deal. Wherever your personal
Brexigraph reading currently is, from Dear Grandchildren, Sorry for Everything,
to FREEDOM! At least some progress has been made after years of struggling with
problems that could only possibly have been foreseen with foresight. LAUGHTER At
the end of that round, Team Potato, Alistair and Simon have 20, Team Potato,
Felicity and Samira have 10. APPLAUSE Since you're behind, Felicity and Samira,
you can take the next question. There will, according to reports, be a shortage
of what for at least another month? Money and sunshine. And food. Yes.
Specifically... Fresh food. Yes. Fruit and veg. Supermarkets have been limiting
customers how many fruits and vegetables they can buy, and I just think Jamie
Oliver must be turning in his grave. LAUGHTER I mean, he's not dead, he's just
very disappointed. Now, obviously, I have come on this show before, I have made
fun of the country that I've lived in for 10 years. I love the UK, I live here.
And I don't want to make fun of you, but.....when something like this happens,
you leave me no choice. LAUGHTER Limiting people from fruit and vegetables. This
government couldn't make enough people sick with their Eat Out To Help Out
campaign, so now they're trying to bring back scurvy. LAUGHTER I think we've
become too namby-pamby as a nation. My grandad fought in World War II, and so,
by extension, did I. LAUGHTER He was a minesweeper in the Royal Navy, he would
go round drinking other people's pints. LAUGHTER That's how we did it in those
days. He was a working-class Mancunian man, he would go weeks without vegetables
by choice. LAUGHTER By the way, backstage at the BBC here, it's just loaded with
fruit and veg. It's like champagne buckets full of cucumbers, there's stacks of
tomatoes, they're like, take whatever you want, we can't move for kumquats.
LAUGHTER Simon, Greg Wallis, the MasterChef hosting pudding fetishist...
Mm...has suggested that people should do what to combat these food shortages?
Store extra food in their little hamster cheeks, like he does. LAUGHTER He said
that they should consider, not exclude, the possibility of dried, frozen or
canned vegetables. Canned vegetables? Frozen vegetables? You mean we don't have
to eat absolutely sparkling, fresh produce gathered on a thrice-daily basis from
the local farmers' market? I mean, does he not realise what most people's
vegetable intake is? Heinz-baked beans and frozen peas on an absolutely absurd
patronising intervention from the hamster-cheeked impresario? LAUGHTER He said,
yes, he suggested people should use tinned or frozen veg and or host an average
of 2.7 TV shows a day. Yeah. Either of those are good options. And Samira and
Felicity, Marks and Spencer have apologised for displaying what alongside
vegetables in one of their shops? I think it was just a cardboard cut out of a
middle finger. LAUGHTER It was daffodils. Daffodils. Daffodils, yeah. Daffodils
next to spring onions, because, of course, they do sort of look a bit like that.
I mean, if you look at the picture, I would have absolutely just grabbed myself
a little bunch of daffodils, chopped them up... That's a joke, I don't cook.
LAUGHTER But if you eat them, they can make you very ill. Yes. Yeah. You can
bunch daffodils, that's what separates them from arses. LAUGHTER As Britain
heads towards a harrowing future of meat and zero-veg meals, consumers have been
told not to panic about shortages. In some supermarkets, empty shelves have been
accessorised with cardboard cut-out pictures of fruit and vegetables, including
at the fictitious budget supermarket Nibble, who have marketed the pictures as
their new North Korean range. LAUGHTER Whilst the Church of England has chipped
in by announcing that all believers have, by default, given up tomatoes for
Lent, so everyone is fine. And the former Environment Secretary, George Eustace,
suggested we should be committing to onshore production of tomatoes. Now, for
those of you wondering, an offshore tomato is more commonly known as a fish.
LAUGHTER And at the end of our final round, the final scores, Alistair and Simon
on Team Potato have 26, and Felicity and Samira on Team Potato have 18. APPLAUSE
Congratulations to our winners, Simon and Alistair, who go home empty-handed.
Felicity and Samira each get two signed copies of Matt Hancock's book. LAUGHTER
Can I please auction that off for the NHS? LAUGHTER Thanks very much for
listening. I've been Andy Zaltzman. Goodbye! CHEERING AND APPLAUSE Taking part
in the News Quiz were Simon Evans, Felicity Ward, Samira Ahmed and Alistair
Beckett-King. In the chair was Andy Zaltzman, and additional material was
written by Alice Fraser, Zoe Tomerlin, Rhiann Shaw and Jay Gebbie. The producer
was Georgia Keating, and it was a BBC Studios production. And there's more
comedy on Wednesday evening with Taxi Driver based Where To Mate at 11 o'clock.
Friends and family pay tribute to Jennifer as Ambridge says goodbye in the
Archers after the news. Then singer-songwriter Natalie Duncan and baroque
violinist Beata Aker add the next five tracks to Add To Playlist. Welcome to the
Spark. In the midst of it, we're going to make decisions that are different than
the decisions that we would make if we were looking from the outside in. Bold
thinking for a better world. We struggle to recognise or remember that these
inequalities come from somewhere. That sense of human connection can save a
life. I'm Helen Lewis with a new series of close-up conversations. More big
thinkers with big ideas bidding to change our world. And hearing some of the
personal reasons behind them. Probably one of the best decisions I've ever made
in my life was making that step. The Spark starts this Tuesday morning at 11.