TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-13H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. These checks carried
out on goods arriving from other parts of the UK and have blocked a return to
power sharing at Stormont until the matter is resolved. Our Chief Political
Correspondent Nick Erdley says the Prime Minister also needs to win over his
Brexit supporting backbenchers, some of whom appear open to changes. They're not
all saying from what they've heard and from what they've been told when they've
been lobbied by senior cabinet ministers over the weekend, they're not saying no
just yet. They want to see the detail. There are some who are unlikely to buy
it, but there are some who I think are persuadable. The big question is how big
is the rebellion in Rishi Sunak's own party? The Tory MP Theresa Villers, who
was part of the Vote Leave campaign, used to be Northern Ireland's Secretary.
She told the Today programme that Parliament should get a vote on any new
agreement and set out her conditions for backing it. I want to see a deal which
delivers a return to power sharing in Northern Ireland. That is crucial. It is
intolerable that we have the protocol undermining political stability in
Northern Ireland. That is extremely worrying and I hope the European Union
recognises that it needs to move its position. The new IRA has claimed
responsibility for shooting a senior police officer in County Tyrone. Police had
already linked the dissident Republican group to last week's attack on Detective
Chief Inspector John Caldwell, who was fired at several times in front of his
young son at a sports centre in Omer. The 48-year-old remains critically ill in
hospital. Six people are still in custody for questioning. The energy regulator
Ofgem has cut by nearly £1,000 the amount that suppliers can charge customers
for gas and electricity. But the typical annual household bill in England,
Scotland and Wales is still set to rise to £3,000 from April as government
support is scaled back and a £400 rebate scheme comes to an end. Campaigners
want that support extended, into the summer. Muhammad Adil is struggling to pay
his bills. I'm going into debt every month, every month. The bill increases. The
energy provider, they basically said at the level that you're paying us, it's
not sustainable and we're going to have to increase your payments. The
government support is absolute pittance, to be honest with you. It doesn't even
cause a ripple in the overall balance. It's just so minimal. Ministers say
they're working to help households who need the most assistance, but also to
ensure that public money is spent appropriately. It's now feared more than 100
migrants may have died after their small boat sank off the coast of southern
Italy. At least 62 people, including 12 children, have been confirmed dead. But
the Coast Guard says many others remain unaccounted for. Speaking at the opening
of the United Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva, the UN Secretary-General,
António Guterres, said countries needed to do more to prevent such tragedies.
Refugee and migrant rights are human rights. They must be respected without
discrimination. While criminal gangs control migration routes, people will
continue to perish. We need safe, orderly, legal routes for migrants and
refugees. Transgender women who've been convicted of any violent offence in
England and Wales will no longer be placed in women's prisons. The policy, which
previously covered sexual offences, has been expanded. There was controversy
last month when a rapist who changed gender after being convicted was briefly
sent to a women's jail in Scotland. Lidl has become the latest supermarket chain
to restrict sales of fruit and vegetables because of a supply shortage. Peppers,
tomatoes and cucumbers will be limited to three per customer. It's just been
announced that the former Speaker of the House of Commons, Lady Boothroyd, has
died at the age of 93. Betty Boothroyd is the only woman to have served in the
role. BBC News. Now on Radio 4, it's time for You and Yours with Winifred
Robinson. Hello, welcome to Radio 4's Consumer Programme. Today we'll be talking
about prepayment meters for energy. They've been force fitted where people are
in persistent debt. They just turned up out of the blue, said basically I have
no leg to stand on, be apt to do it, otherwise they'd have done it without me
being here. The energy companies have been ordered to stop and review what
they've done. So how is that going? Would World Book Day still work well in
schools without the children dressing up? Definitely is an extra stress. I think
his school is doing, he has to be the word, so he has to dress like his
favourite word. So God knows what I'm going to do. I don't know. And we'll be
looking at how scammers are hitting the Transport for London bikes for hire. If
you want to get in touch with us, here's our email address,
youandyoursofbbc.co.uk. You can also tweet us, hashtag youandyours, or send
texts to 84844. The amount suppliers can charge households for energy has been
cut by the regulator Ofgem, but bills will still rise in April as government
help eases. Ofgem's announcement doesn't directly affect what customers pay for
each unit of gas and electricity, but it will reduce the costs faced by the
government. The typical household bill will rise to £3,000 a year from April.
The rising cost of energy has hit the poorest households hardest. Energy firms
have been forcing customers in debt to have prepayment meters. There's now a
temporary ban on force-fitting them, after British Gas was exposed by the Times
newspaper using debt agents to break into the homes of vulnerable people to fit
these prepayment meters. Before we came on air, I spoke to Elizabeth, the
charity Christians Against Poverty put us in touch with her. She lives in
Burton-on-Trent and had a prepayment meter fitted without her consent in
September by her energy company, Utility Warehouse. She told me what happened.
Well, obviously I was on my own and they come to the door. I answered it. There
was a locksmith waiting in the van and a dog handler and he said basically that
he had to wring up my energy supplier to change the meter over. And if I weren't
in, he would have come in while I weren't here. He said he would have gone
upstairs to make sure there was no one that suffered with sleep apnea and then
got in my fridge to make sure there was no medication and then just left me a
note on the door to say they'd been. So they would have checked. Sorry to
interrupt. So they would have done some basic checks to make sure there was no
one living in the house who was ill? Yes, basically. He said that if I weren't
in, they would have entered the property. They must have been already because
they knew I had a dog because they come with a dog handler as well. How much did
you owe at this point? It was about £3,700 and something, I think it was. Wow,
that's a lot, isn't it? So what was happening? Were you meant to be paying by
direct debit? What it was, is I was paying, I think it was £130 a month and then
all of a sudden out of the blue, they decided I weren't paying enough. And then
they wanted like me around £300 a month off me. With me being on universal
credit, there was no way I could have afforded that, do you know what I mean? So
they just turned up out of the blue, said basically I had no leg to stand on.
They had to do it. Otherwise they'd have done it without me being here. What
they say is that you didn't engage with them, by which they mean that you didn't
answer their, well, what do they mean? They mean that you didn't negotiate with
them? I phoned them and phoned them and phoned them and I was getting nowhere
with them. They said that they needed the money basically. So what they've done
is put me on prepayment and then put a debt on my meter. So I had £3.50 on me
electric and £3.50 on my gas a week to clear the debt. Not only was I having to
pay what I was using, I was having to cover the £3.50 as well. Would you want to
go back to the way it was before? I think I'd stay how I am now because at the
minute I know where I am. Do you ever have to let the meter run out? Sometimes
yeah. I have emergency but I try not to use that if I can help it. But sometimes
you do use it and you use it all? Yeah. And then what happens? I mean, when does
that happen? What was that like? I have to ring them up. Obviously before
Christians Against Poverty helped me, they helped me a great deal. I was having
to ring them up but say if they had to put some money on my meter for me until I
was due to get paid, they'd put it on top of my debt. So they'd get it back that
way if that makes sense. So you were never completely without but you were
having to ring them up every time. I understand. Yeah, I understand. Is there
anyone in your household who's vulnerable? My younger son, he's got loads of
health problems and he's just been diagnosed with autism. Well, two years ago he
got diagnosed with autism. So really you are a vulnerable household, do you
think? Yeah, yes I am. Do you think the rules need to be changed before these
prepayment meetings? Absolutely, because I felt intimidated. So if it was an
elderly person, do you know what I mean? They wouldn't think twice to answer
that door, do you know what I mean? And if they're on their own, you know, it's
not right, is it? I felt really rock bottom, if you like, because I had the dog
handler outside, I had the locksmith outside, do you know what I mean? So I do
think we need to put that into consideration really. Ms Elizabeth, well, Utility
Warehouse told us it had followed the correct procedures before installing her
prepayment meter, which they did as a last resort. All of the energy companies
have been told by the regulator Ofgem that they must review what they've done
with these prepayment meters and take them out and compensate customers where
appropriate. We asked the five big providers if they have contacted any
customers yet, replaced any of these meters yet, or offered any one
compensation, but none of those providers answered those questions directly.
Elizabeth Blakelock is the Principal Policy Manager at Citizens Advice.
Elizabeth, good afternoon to you. Does anyone know yet the scale of this
practice of force fitting these prepayment meters or switching people who have a
smart meter onto prepayment without their consent? Good afternoon. I'm afraid
the data that we do have suggests that this is a widespread practice, not one
which is a last resort, which is absolutely where we're supposed to be.
Widespread in terms of the fact that people have been forced onto these
prepayment meters because they're struggling to pay their energy bill. But not
only people who are interacting with their energy company, you know, trying to
make things work, but also people who should never have been put onto a
prepayment meter because they are in a vulnerable household. And what we mean by
that when we're talking about these issues in energy is people who have got
health challenges, but also people with children in the home. And, you know,
listening to that story that we've just heard then, you know, it breaks your
heart, but I'm afraid it's not just a few people who have that experience. What
we see at Citizens Advice in our data is that this was, before this ban, a very
regular occurrence, that energy companies were not doing enough checks to make
sure that the person in that house, it was whether or not it was safe for them
to have that prepayment meter. So what we need to see now to be confident that
we can trust these firms to be able to interact with their customers, to help
their customers manage their debt, we need to hear them say loud and clear, yes,
we know we are doing those checks. And I have to say, when we think about this
pause, it's only due to run to the end of March. And I am really concerned that
that is just not long enough for these companies to get their house in order.
People have never been allowed to run up energy bills that they can't pay. So if
we don't want people like Elizabeth to pay that steep rise in energy bills,
which she explained, she used to pay £130, it used to cover it, suddenly it
didn't. Don't we need to have new social tariffs for the least well off? You're
raising a really important point there. You know, we're talking about the short
term response to a crisis. But we know there are very large groups of people who
are really struggling right now to pay their bills. Now, there's two things
there. There's people who have always or have for a very long time really
struggled to pay their bill. Unfortunately, they might do in the future. And I
think it's right that we consider what kind of support, what kind of safety net
should we have in place. And it's great to hear so much consensus from charities
like ours, and also at the regulator Ofgem around some kind of intervention that
could be a social tariff. We haven't quite got to a consensus on what does that
mean? What kind of discount? What groups of people would need that support? But
what we do know is that we can't see those people continue to struggle, continue
to be forced onto prepayment meters. And that's why we want to see this ban
extended to make sure that the companies are doing what they can. But also, of
course, we've been hearing about the energy price guarantee, which is due to go
up on the 1st of April. I mean, that's creating a real crunch point for energy
consumers, where you're seeing the end of the energy bill support scheme, the
reintroduction of forcing people onto prepayment meters, and an increase in the
energy price guarantee. We don't need that to happen. And we need to make sure
that people aren't being forced onto these prepayment meters when the company
are not doing the proper checks. As you said, this is a temporary ban on fitting
these meters without consent. I think it ends at the end of March, as you said.
Have you seen any evidence that the energy companies are reviewing cases,
reversing decisions? I'm glad to say that we haven't seen any people being
forced on. Yes, so they've stopped? In that period. They have stopped. But
they've been told to review what they've done. Yeah, we've called for that, and
so has the regulator. And I'm afraid we haven't seen that evidence coming
through yet. They're actually making that effort to say that there's clearly
been mistakes made, that the checks weren't being undertaken. So now we need to
go back and say, is it safe for you to have a prepayment meter to that customer?
Understand the situation that that person's in, and make sure that it's safe for
that prepayment to be there. And we've also backed this call for compensation to
people who have been forced onto it. Elizabeth, what might be a reasonable
figure? Anyone know? I think it's important to really engage with that customer
to understand the harm that's been caused. I wouldn't want to cap an amount of
money, a pound amount of money, for someone who's been compensated when we know
there are such difficult stories, such extensive harm being caused to people in
their homes. Elizabeth Blakelock from Citizens Advice. Thank you. Well, as she
was saying, Elizabeth, Ofgem has set a new price cap today. That won't make any
difference to household bills, though, because the government also is capping
energy prices at the moment, and has already set the cap for the average energy
bill from April. It will rise to £3,000. Craig Lowry is the principal consultant
at Cornwall Insight. It's an independent energy consultancy. Craig, it's a
complicated business, this, isn't it? Two price caps going at the same time. But
the important one is the government price cap. As I said, bills are going to
rise in April from £2,000 to £3,000, just on average. If you use more, you'll
pay more. If you use less, you'll pay less. Is there any way that that average
price cap set by the government could still come down? Good afternoon. It
certainly is a possibility. However, what we have seen so far from the
Chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, is that there's no immediate additional support on the
horizon. That being said, obviously, with the budget coming up next month, we
often do see surprises in the budget. So, while publicly it's been ruled out,
obviously, we don't know for definite until we actually get the budget next
month. Now, prices on wholesale markets have been plummeting, haven't they,
prices of energy. What do forecasters think will happen in the summer when
there's a new price cap? Will prices start to come down then? Well, certainly,
our current forecast for the cap for the period from July onwards, we're
predicting rates closer to £2,200 per year. But that, unfortunately, is
dependent upon the prevailing wholesale prices that we've seen, that continuing
into spring and beyond. So, unfortunately, while there is that hope on the
horizon, unfortunately, it's still too soon to say if this will actually be the
case. I mean, it's such an extraordinary thing, isn't it, that's happened with
the energy markets. It wasn't long ago that we were telling people that they
should switch to save. It's almost impossible to switch now. When do you think
we'll see a return to that, ever? Well, I certainly think there's the potential
for switching as we've seen the decline in the wholesale market. And, you know,
as I've said, with the cap for the second half of 2023 being, frankly, well
below the prevailing rate of the energy price guarantee of £3,000. So, you know,
I certainly think that there's a lot of potential there for switching in the
months ahead. But crucially, it's a case of the supplier's ability to offer
those sorts of lower tariffs. And I guess at the same time, the question also as
to whether or not suppliers want to re-engage with the energy market. You know,
we've had a history of high rates of switching in the market. However, over the
last few months, you know, that certainly hasn't been the case as the price cap
and the government protections have been in place. So there's the question of
the customer willingness to actually go back out there and look for lower cost
tariffs if suppliers are ready, willing and able to offer them. Thank you,
Larry, energy analyst. Thank you. Now, with half term over, it should be back to
normal for parents across Britain. But for many, the first Thursday in March is
a time for organising outfits for World Book Day. It's the day when children
dress up as their favourite character from a book. Easy if it's Charlie from The
Chocolate Factory, a lot harder if it happens to be Willy Wonka. UNESCO started
it all back in 1995 as a worldwide celebration of books and reading. But some
people think it's time to give the dressing up bit of it a rest. Our reporter
Tom Mosley asked some parents in Salford whether they enjoy it. Yes, I love it.
It's my favourite time of year. Yeah, I do. What is it about it? Just love
dressing the children up. Where do you get the costumes from? Make them. No,
it's not my kind of thing at all. So I've just bought his off Amazon and he
wanted to be a... Who are you being for World Book Day? No, he's being Ash from
Pokemon. And I was like, well, that's not a book, but he's got a book of
Pokemon. So it is a book to him. And then the baby's going to be Pikachu. But
for me, I just think it's just too commercialised. Waste of time, waste of
money. And I'm very miserable. Yes, I have to say my other half here was a
teacher. Well, it's a teacher, so she's always gone in World Book Day dressed
up. I think World Book Day for the BBC. Recycled last year's outfit this year.
It's a tiny bit small, but it will do. It all depends on your attitude, doesn't
it? It depends if you feel like it needs to be a showy event or not, but it
isn't really. It's about what the kids want to do. It's really difficult,
especially when their favourite books don't necessarily have costumes. Honestly,
that was £17, Grace. Yeah. What was it? The cat in the hat. £17. And he's going
to wear it once a year and that's it. Definitely is an extra stress. I think his
school is doing, he has to be the word. So he has to dress like his favourite
word. So God knows what I'm going to do. I don't know. They try and say, you
know, try and do it yourself, but I just tend to buy. I do, just because it's
easier and less stress. Where do you get the costumes from? Well, we make them.
We make them at home. Yeah. All clothes. Just out of clothes. Yeah. Matilda's
quite easy to do. So, yeah. I love Matilda. Some parents and children in Salford
with their thoughts on dressing up for World Book Day. So could you do a good
book day without dressing up? James Erskine is the chief executive of Rocket.
It's a youth marketing agency and he works with some of the UK's biggest book
publishers. He has two children of his own and so does Connie Hook. She is a
former Blue Peter presenter. She's the author of five children's books. Connie,
as a Blue Peter presenter, I'm guessing you're really great at making stuff. So
for you, it won't be a worry about the expense, will it? Could you do it well
though, World Book Day, without the costumes? You know, basically, as I think
someone mentioned in your audio just there, some characters don't have specific
costumes. You know, if you're going as one of, I don't know, the famous five,
for instance. So it can be as complicated or as simple as you want it to be,
essentially. And I totally agree with some of the parents that were commenting
about how, you know, it spoils the fun if it gets too competitive and too
commercial, having to buy expensive outfits. But you shouldn't ever have to do
that. That's not really what it's about. James Erskine, how important is World
Book Day to children's publishing as an event? It's pretty huge. Children's
publishing is an incredible business on last count, worth about £245 million
across all of the different books. So it's very big. And to become a World Book
Day book, it's a really, really thing of immense pride in children's authors.
And what I think World Book Day does really well is it brings children's books
to the forefront of conversation. So whether you do have the dressing up or you
don't, it's really nice that there is a day when children can discuss their
reading habits. And what World Book Day would say is that they're also promoting
reading to those that don't necessarily take part in reading themselves that
much. World Book Day is a charity and it's funded by the book industry. They are
paying for in effect free books, aren't they? So your children get a voucher,
don't they? Tell me how that works. That's exactly right. Children get a voucher
and they're able to exchange it. There are also cost-effective books. So they've
got a load of books on their website that cost around £1 or £1.50. They've also
got the free books. They've also got free audio books. But the voucher, what
happens with your voucher? You literally take the voucher, you can go into a
local bookshop and you will get a discount on one of the World Book Day books.
And that's how that works. And each year you have a number of specific World
Book Day titles and it depends who is the World Book Day authors that year.
They've got them split up by the relevant age categories. And yeah, they're
giving a book to every youth reader in the United Kingdom. So James, it's really
important obviously for families where they don't go to bookshops often and for
some children, they reckon that these free books or the book you get with the
voucher is the first book that child will have had. So if it's all about
reading, do children really have to be encouraged to dress up, do you think? I
think Connie makes a really good point because sometimes if a book is
independent and it's not one that everybody knows, you're not going to know how
the lead character dresses. So I know that seems like a logistical problem, but
I think it does point to the fact that maybe there aren't enough independent
books that people are dressing up as. I think it can be done without the
dressing up, but I think there are hacks. My little boy who's 10 loves football.
So he's going as a football player because he's read one of the Oldfield
Brothers books about various different football legends. And my darling daughter
is eight and she's actually taking in a shoebox scene of 78-storey treehouse as
opposed to dressing up as the character. Did she make it herself though, James?
Because I used to think that the teachers sat around the cauldron in the staff
room and thought, what can we ask them to do next? No, she did make it herself.
How about a shoebox tableau? Well, exactly. She made it herself with a lot of
help from my beautiful wife. So yeah, there was help there. But I do think that
I understand the stresses and the strains of getting people to dress up in fancy
dress. But I do think it does get general excitement because it's allowing
children to communicate what they've read to other children. And there's a good
kind of cross-pollination of different reading hints and tips across various
different schools and various different classrooms. Leslie Hook, I know you do a
lot of World Book Day events. We've heard how it helps children. How does it
help writers? So there are 10,000 children's books that come out every year and
it's so hard. Any grown-up will tell you how it's hard to find what to watch
next on your Netflix or whatever because we live in a world that is so consumer-
driven, that there's so much choice. So as James just pointed out, basically the
fact that it will get PR essentially, not PR but sort of eyes on books that
might not have heard of. Children ask each other, oh, who have you come as? And
they might not have heard of that book. And a lot of book selling and interest
in books is to do with word of mouth because a child will read a book, they'll
be enthused about it, they'll tell their friend. And someone like, say, for
instance, J.K. Rowling, to take an example of an author everyone's heard of, it
took her a long time to get her publishing deal. And Mallory Blackman, there's
countless authors that go through a lot of rejection to get there. And there's
countless more that haven't got there yet. So the fact that this shines a light
on books and books you might not have heard of, I would encourage parents to
actually get their kids to think about books that might not be your sort of
usual suspect, because books give kids empathy. And if kids have empathy, then
when they become adults, they'll go into the workplace and help make the world a
better place, essentially. So it's so important in this sort of digital age that
we keep children enthused about books and reading. Connie Hook, James Erskine,
thanks both. And we've just had a text in from someone to say the Cheshire
Libraries are doing a free costume swap for a book on World Book Day. Now, if
you've tried to renew your car insurance lately, you may have seen it go up by
quite a bit. Other types of insurance haven't risen in the same way. Research
for the price comparison site Confused.com found that car insurance premiums
went up by 19% last year. The insurers measure it differently, but they also
admit that it rose by 8% in the last three months of last year alone. The rising
prices of car insurance is something that Megan Hayhoe's noticed. She's a
veterinary nurse in Essex. When I get my renewals through, they're always
extortionate compared to the previous year. You're looking 500 pounds more for
no change in my situation, no change in address, no change in points, accidents.
And yet they're just rising every year when you get your renewal. So you have to
shop around, which I do do anyway, but even shopping around, they are
extortionately high compared to a few years ago. So it's been a bit of a fun one
for me because I've got a new car. So I bought a Ford Mustang, which is very
different to my old car. So my renewal price was a lot higher. However,
initially I had a quote for roughly 1,400 pounds. They then decided they
wouldn't honour that. And my next quote was 1,800 pounds was the cheapest. And
unfortunately I had to take it. I didn't have another option. That was the
cheapest quote I could get. But that's a nearly 400 pound jump from I'm talking
three days difference in my quotes. My previous car was an Audi S3. My insurance
was around 800 and something pounds. And I did get a renewal quote for that
before I got my new car. And the renewal quote, I believe it was 1,400 for that
as well. But again, that's with no change of anything. It's a lot of money to go
up by. Something's got to give eventually. There's rising costs of living for
everything. If you can't afford to drive to work because you can't afford to
insure your car, you can't then earn the money that you need to pay your bills.
It's all, you know, it all backfires and it's extremely difficult at the moment.
Apologies if you can hear my parrot in the background. She does like to get
involved in everything that I do. That was Megan Hayhoe. I'm Paris in Essex. I
did wonder what it was. Well, listening to that is Ian Plummer, who's the
director of Auto Trader. Ian, good afternoon to you. Tell me why have the prices
of car insurance gone up by so much? I think fundamentally there are three key
factors driving the price of insurance. The cost of the asset that you're
insuring, the car price has gone up. The cost of repairing that asset, parts,
labor and so on are affecting all of that. And then the risk, thirdly, of losing
the asset completely or of replacing it. Losing it completely is otherwise known
as theft, of course, replacing it if unfortunately it's fully damaged and needs
a write-off replacement. So the price of cars has risen dramatically over the
last couple of years. We're seeing on our platform the cost of new cars, all the
data sets we get has risen by around 37% since 2019 to an average around £39,000
for a new car and the used car equivalent has risen by around 45%. So you can
see in just those headline numbers of the cost of the asset itself, you're
insuring an item that is considerably more valuable than it was previously.
That's a big driver of the changes that you've just talked about. Last year
rules came into force that stopped insurers charging loyal customers more than
they charge new clients. They weren't meant to be bringing in any more money
overall by doing that. But it does mean, doesn't it, that the people seeing the
steepest rises now are the people who used to look for deals and switch and
save. I completely agree that there's a lot of challenge in the example that was
aired just a moment ago that I'm hearing from more broadly across the market. I
think shopping around remains, as your contributor highlighted, remains a vital
part of the way to find a good solution here. But I think fundamentally we
should recognise that the insurance values actually declined through 2020,
premiums did drop at that point. And we're exiting the sort of lockdown
pressures, well, with lockdown pressures with a supply-driven context in the car
market where we've had a constrained level of supply of new cars over the last
three years. That's feeding through into the prices of the new and used, feeding
through also now into the premiums that are following the increase of price. So,
pricing going up as fast as it is, it's hard to sort of stay in line with that
and keep in touch with the sort of typical inflation rate, which is obviously
already high that we're all facing right now. And shopping around to find the
best opportunity is really key here. But I think we should recognise that the
fundamental complexity of the car has radically changed too. We've got parts and
tech in the car that are far more valuable than they used to be. So we're
driving around often these days with not fully autonomous cars by any stretch,
but with cars that have a lot of autonomous functionality. So when, for example,
we need a bumper repair because we've dinged the car on the front or back, in
past times that would have been a quite simple job of a part and a bit of paint
and some labour obviously to pay. And in many cases for older vehicles, that's
still what we do. But for a newer vehicle, we've probably got adaptive cruise
control on the front of the car with sensors that need changing. They're quite
expensive, quite complicated to fit, need somebody different in a body shop. And
in the back, you've probably got a rear view camera in your rear bumper. So that
again needs a replacement part. And so it's not just the bumper. All those
things that make cars safer and more enjoyable to drive are driving a cost of
insurance as well as obviously the cost of the car itself. They're no longer
allowed to give you a better price if you're a new customer. But if you renew
early, it can be a lot cheaper. Go Compare says that customers saved 44% on
average if they thought to buy their car insurance 27 days before their renewal
date. Why is that? Honestly, I'm not an expert in that side of the insurance
equation. Is it even still true? I find that equally baffling. Yeah, I wonder is
it even still true? It's baffling. And I agree with you, if you don't get a
necessarily a cheaper price than an existing customer with a given insurer, that
doesn't necessarily mean that you won't find a cheaper price than the one you're
being offered by your current insurer. So hence shopping around still would have
sense, even if the playing field is hopefully more level and fairer than it
previously was, which is only a good thing for us all. Ian Plummer, Director of
Autotrader, thank you very much for that. Bike hire in cities has been a thing
for quite a while. They're all over the UK. In London, they used to call them
Boris bikes, now they're called Santander bikes. But one man's thinking twice
about using them after a bizarre incident a week ago, which has led to hundreds
of pounds being taken from his bank account. Our reporter Shari Valsey to tell
us what's been going on. So Winifred, we were contacted by Jeremy, who lives
right in the middle of London. He's just around the corner from the BBC offices
at Broadcasting House. And he's been using these city bikes or Santander bikes,
as they're called now, for ages. And what happens is you pay a small fee, and
essentially get on the bike and off you go. Many people use an app to unlock the
bike. But for those who don't use apps or smartphones, there's a system for
those. And Jeremy explained to me how it works. There's a row of Santander bikes
on the pavement or wherever. And then there's a kind of machine and you have to
tap the screen a number of times about your age, how many bikes you want and
that kind of thing. And then you have to tap your card to pay the £1.65, which
you have to pay for every 30 minutes. Then you get your little ticket with
Santander cycles on it with a five digit number. You walk over to whichever bike
you like the look of. Sometimes they're broken, but not very often. They have a
little pad and you tap your five digits. They're always one, two or three in
different combinations. And your bicycle is unlocked and you get on and you
cycle to wherever you want to go and put it back in a free dock somewhere else.
Yeah, it's a really good system. I use it a lot. So last Friday, Jeremy was
coming home from shopping and he found a row of bikes just outside Broadcasting
House about half past six in the evening. Now, as I say, he's lived in London
for years and years and years. So he's a kind of pretty switched on kind of guy,
you know, he's not easily ruffled. I was standing by what I call the machine and
I was aware of two young boys. They were 15 or something, about 10, 15 meters
away. And they rang alarm bells. You know, I've just felt on the alert, not sure
about this. There was nobody else around and it's quite dark. So I started
pressing the screen in various places, which you have to. I tapped my card and
immediately after that, one of the boys came up to me and stood right by me, not
in a threatening way, but I wasn't going to challenge him, put it that way. And
he said something. I turned to him and said, I didn't hear what you said. Sorry.
And he said, do you mind hurrying up because we want to use the machine. And
while I was turning away his mates, whatever you want to call him, his
accomplice, he rushed up. Your ticket drops down into a slot. He picked the
ticket up and I saw him disappearing around the corner. And that was that. I was
scammed. So at that stage, you still had your card. Yes, I did. I think I put it
in my pocket. Yeah. You still had your bank card, which of course you would have
been concentrating on as the thing of value that somebody might be trying to
take. Yeah, yeah, yeah. When did you realise that they'd actually not taken or
gone for your bank card at all, but they'd taken the slip of paper that had
dropped out of the machine? Immediately. They could take that number to any bike
station and get a bike and use it forever. Which is essentially, Winifred, what
they have done. And once they take that bike out, if they don't return it, £1.65
is charged to Jeremy's card every half an hour. And from what we can see, that
is exactly what happened. And to date, Jeremy says the charges have reached
£380. Poor Jeremy. So I asked him about what he did next. I felt foolish. I'd
been caught out because, you know, I'm on the alert to this sort of thing. So
within about three minutes, I waited for them to go because there's a number you
can phone and I didn't want to be hanging around on my phone because I thought
they might steal that. So I walked in the direction of my flat and immediately
rang TFL. It took a long time to get through, but I did eventually. They weren't
very sympathetic at all. I don't really blame them. But eventually they said,
before we do anything, you've got to contact Action Fraud and you get a number
from them and then you come back to us. But it was a Friday night and Action
Fraud's closed over the weekend. Action Fraud closed at the weekend. Yeah. It's
the only place that you can call to report you've been defrauded. And exactly as
TFL required Jeremy to do so before he could report to them what had happened
with the boys and the slip of paper and the bike, is closed from eight o'clock
in the evening on Friday until 8am on Monday morning. But can you not go online?
You can. You can make an online fraud report with Action Fraud at any time. So I
asked Jeremy if he'd done that. No, I don't really like, you know, I don't have
much faith in that, I have to say. But I thought, well, that's all right. I'll
ring them on Monday. I was aware that there was a £300 penalty or something if
you didn't return the bike. And when I've had bikes in the past, I'm always very
careful. I never leave it outside a shop ever for a minute, you know. So I was
aware of that, which is fair enough. But on this occasion, I never had the slip
of paper. I never had the bicycle. And I reported it within 15 minutes at the
most in detail. Payments have gone out of my account. So has it stopped? No. It
hasn't stopped? No, no. There's a, I think it was £77 and £50 went out of my
account to TFL yesterday. And I had to stop thinking about it. Otherwise it
could have driven me crazy. And Winnifred, there are loads of people who can't
or don't want to use the online system. So they have to wait till Monday morning
to report their fraud the way Jeremy did. He rang Action Fraud on Monday and
then he rang TFL back. And in the meantime, his bank RBS had rung him to tell
him that they had declined a suspicious looking TFL payment. And he thought that
was that. But was it? No. He was continued to be charged £77 for 24 hours. And
it was coming out of his bank account. And while the kids who nicked the slip of
paper or the five digit code were joyfully riding around on his bike, Jeremy
didn't get any joy from TFL. So he contacted us. And just as the total had
reached that magic £380, I contacted TFL. Now they wouldn't come on the
programme, but they did send a statement and they said, we apologise to Jeremy
for any distress that he got receiving these charges. And they're actually
trying to investigate how this happened. They say incidents like this fraud are
extremely rare. And they do encourage everybody or anybody who experiences this
to, especially around the docking stations of this suspicious behaviour, to get
in touch with them and Action Fraud helpline immediately. And they say they are
going to refund him completely. But that trick of distracting you and then
taking something from you, that is an old, old trick. It happened to me 10 years
ago. I remember when that happened to you because weren't you at an ATM, a hole
in the wall cash machine? Far from where this happened to Jeremy, I was on a
busy day, very busy touristy day in London. I was standing at the NatWest cash
machine. I had my purse out because I'd taken the card out of there, put the
card in. And just as the card came out, somebody tapped me on the shoulder,
looked like a tourist and said, you've dropped £5 on the floor. Just as I looked
away, someone behind me pinched my card, but they had been looking over my
shoulder and read the number. So they were away and used that card. And it is an
old trick. Did they get cash out because they got both things? Yeah, they had
the card, they'd read the number and in the time it took me to get into the bank
to report it, amazingly they'd taken out more than £1,000. I didn't even think
you could take that much money out on a single card. I remember that. I know it
was a long time ago, but I've never forgotten it. And it's called shoulder
surfing. And in fact, in 2019 in London, there were reports that instead of
nicking the little slip of paper for these bikes to get the five digit code for
the Santander bikes, thieves would just look over the shoulder of the person
with the code and then remember the code, get to the bike first, punch it into
the bike and zoom off. Now those thieves targeted tourist areas. And so TFL
installed CCTV in those areas. Now what I call shoulder surfing, they call cycle
surfing. Back then it was £2 for 24 hours to hire a bike, but now it's £1.65 for
30 minutes. So if you get into trouble or this happens, it's going to cost you.
And Jeremy says there's reputational harm for the economy of London if this
isn't addressed. If you're a tourist or something, English isn't your first
language or something, you just wouldn't be able to spend three hours on the
phone, would you, in 12 different phone calls with three different
bureaucracies? I mean, they must have algorithms to see that this is unusual for
me. I've been doing this for however long they've been in existence, you know, I
can see if somebody just dumps a bike, then they are going to have to pay £300.
That's probably in the contract. But when somebody reports immediately a scam,
they should stop any payments out of my account. So Shari, one question then,
does anyone know where the bike is? Yeah, well, they're not dragging the canals
exactly, but TFL tell me that all these bikes have GPS tracking systems on them
and that the bike has now been reported as stolen. So the system where the team
start looking for that bike has started. This problem, Shari, of kind of poor
customer service when things go wrong, in response to that first item that we've
just run about people having these prepayment meters fitted against their will,
people have been emailing just to say, this same problem, my provider falsely
accused me of obtaining free electricity from my meter. In fact, it was a
complex mix up on their part. But when I phone to complain, no joy. And this is
another one, Nicola, I live in mid Wales, made a complaint to my provider about
overcharging. They've charged me 10 times what I owe. They're determined to fit
one of these meters. They've even given me a date. They've even said they will
be attending just no date yet. It's madness, isn't it? It is. I mean, the fact
that people can't get in touch with the providers is the backbone of this
complaint with TFL. It's the most awful thing that happens. Something goes wrong
and you can't report it. Well, thanks for bringing that to us anyway. It is two
years now since the announcement that all of the high street top shops were
going to close. It happened when the Arcadia Group collapsed. Top Shop at that
point had more than 500 stores right across the world in more than 50 countries.
But over 300 of those top shops were here in the UK and they occupied some of
the biggest and best retail space in Oxford Circus in London, in Liverpool One,
in Victoria Square, in Belfast. So hundreds of empty stores were left an awful
lot of space to fill. Our reporter, Linda Walker, went to see what's been done
with the former top shop store in Harrogate. I'm standing here on Cambridge
Street in Harrogate, where you might not even be aware of the huge retail unit
which used to be home to the town's top shop store. It closed back in 2017
before the full collapse of the Arcadia Group in 2020. Now the unit has been
split into three, offering a new home to a Sainsbury's local, a Skipton Building
Society and the Cozy Club, offering a bar and dining space. You're one of the
customers of Skipton. How is it now that they've relocated here? Do you find it
much more convenient? Definitely. The shop's bigger. It's nice and warm. It's
definitely better than the old one. Definitely. We are seeing less retail and
more service-led businesses. Yes, definitely. To me, on the main street, we
don't want a supermarket. We should have nicer shops now. I mean, have the days
gone when we have no... Mind you, Harrogate's got lots of nice shops, but this
is the main street. Quite a few empty shops at the moment, which it's a shame
because we get a lot of visitors coming into Harrogate and, you know, they don't
want to look at empty shops. I'm going to go inside now and take a look. Cozy
Club is famous for its vintage decor, its bright wallpaper, its paintings and
its chandeliers. And this branch has taken over all of what used to be Topshop's
first floor. Hi, I'm Gidon Amar from Broadland Properties. We're commercial
property investors. We purchased this property as a vacant Topshop unit and in
all it totaled about 25,000 square foot over several floors. We purchased it in
August 2020, so really in the middle of COVID. And it was just with the mindset
that we felt retailers would be there for the space. The property had sat vacant
for several years and we just were of the opinion that if we could split it up
and create units the size that retailers would want, which are typically
smaller, then we'd be able to sort of re-let it. So we ended up splitting the
property into three separate distinct units. The first unit was let to
Sainsbury's as a sort of city centre supermarket. We then let the second unit in
the middle to Skipton Building Society as their branch. They relocated from a
side street nearby. And the final letting was to Cozy Club, who effectively have
a grand floor lobby with good frontage onto Cambridge Street and then the entire
first floor where they've opened this beautiful restaurant. One thing we learned
is that it's price sensitive. You know, the retailers, as soon as we could show
that we can create the size of space that they actually want, the retailers
started coming forward. But there was a certain price point. And I think having
Leeds and York on the doorstep, where traditionally the sort of main shopping
centres in Yorkshire or in this sort of Western North Yorkshire area is a
challenge for retailers from a fashion perspective because they all have the
offering here. And so Harrogate would start to fall short of being able to
attract those companies to come to this high street. Harrogate is very much a
day out town. There's beautiful architecture here, there's parks and there's,
you know, lots of different cafes and restaurants to attract people here. So
whether you're coming with your family or meeting a friend, that's one thing
that really draws people in. And so having shops and occupiers that complement
that goes quite nicely. Across the UK and Ireland, former Topshop sites have
been given a variety of new uses. On Dublin's St Stephen's Green, co-working
space Grafter have taken over the building. In Sheffield, York and Newcastle,
Topshop sites are now large vintage clothing stores. And on Edinburgh's famous
Princess Street, the Rock Group have put forward plans for a new luxury hotel.
Diners in Harrogate told me how they feel about their changing high street. Did
you know this used to be a Topshop? Yes, I remember. I wasn't a very regular
customer of Topshop, but yes, I do remember. What do you think of it? I know you
brought your mum along today. What do you think of what they've done with these
three units now? Well, I've brought my mum here as a treat because I think it's
such a lovely place, such a cosy place. The decor is fabulous with all the
details. Even the chairs are special and I just love it here, yeah. However,
we've lost so many retail shops in Harrogate and it is a bit sad. So you're here
having breakfast today. What do you think of what used to be the Topshop store?
Well, it's very nice. I mean, the food's lovely, the staff are lovely and I'm
all for encouraging more businesses to come into the big place. But what I do
miss is the fact that they haven't got anywhere to shop. So, I mean, even New
Look's closing, River Island's closing, my daughter's got to go to Leeds or
Newcastle to get clothes. Matt, do you think that this is really the future for
organisations like yours, sort of looking at different ways that we can use
spaces on the high street so that we can bring leisure and retail together more
with residential? There'll always be an evolution of the built environment,
whether it be at the moment we're seeing the retail reducing and occupiers like
Cosy Club take the space or who knows what it could be in another 10, 20 years'
time. But that will always be the challenge for investors and also consultants
and design teams working with what the current trend is and what occupiers
require for that building to be. Hi, I'm Ben. I'm the general manager here at
Cosy Club Harrogate. We really work on, like, a footfall from the retail. So we
always try and position our venues somewhere with good footfall in the middle of
a city centre where we can be easily accessible to people coming past the
building. You know, the challenges here have been getting our brand out to the
local public, becoming well known and then building a business from there. Gidon
told me that the Cambridge street site was the first acquisition of this kind
for his company and it's important that high streets adapt to meet the needs of
their local businesses and customers. Since then, we've actually gone to acquire
several more properties across the UK, being in Edinburgh, York, something in
the south east that we're doing at the moment. And in each instance, it's been
properties where there might be the property is either vacant or there's very
short term income from an existing tenant and the property may be coming vacant
soon. We've typically tried to focus on some of the strongest locations within
the best cities. So Edinburgh, for example, is somewhere where we've invested
quite heavily recently. And actually in each instance, we found out that the
high street is coming back and it's coming back quite nicely. That was Gidon
Amar from Broadland Properties talking to Linda Walker in Harrogate. Lisa
Carlson is the chair of the Association of Town and City Management and she's
also chief executive of Canterbury Business Improvement District. Lisa, good
afternoon to you. This time last year, more than eight out of 10 of the former
Arcadia Group stores were still empty. Does anyone know where we're at with
these vacancies now? Well, it's really encouraging to hear from Harrogate and
we're definitely seeing a few more like that around the country. I think similar
to Harrogate, which is a nice mixed use example, we've got Wimbledon and that's
an even larger example where they're seeing the conversion of the Centre Court
Shopping Centre, which hosted several Arcadia fashion brands until 2021. So the
idea there is to create a more environmentally friendly and sustainable place
for people to meet. So it's that idea of giving all of us new reasons to come
into the town centre, things that we want, things that we need, places to hang
out with our friends and our family and also colleagues, but also including
places to shop. So it's a multi-purpose development with climbing walls, virtual
golf, they've got a co-working hub, a gym and also new retail and hospitality.
So that's an exciting vision of how you can transform what would have otherwise
been an oversupply of retail only space into something that appeals to more
people. So do you think that's the answer to break the big, big top shops into
smaller units or have some companies taken them over, using them as they are? I
think that's the general answer, which is to divide up the larger retail space.
So this is the evolution that we're seeing that over the last several decades,
we've probably had an oversupply of larger retail space. I mean, I hasten to add
that doesn't mean we don't still need some of it, we do. But breaking those
units down into smaller units is an easier way for those larger spaces to be
repurposed. But we're also seeing, I think in the case of Bath, they're
definitely bucking the trend there, where their top shop is being merged with
other retail units to create a Zara superstore. And that's occupying over 32,000
square feet. In Horsham, the top shop's been repurposed to a supermarket. So
there are some cases where it is the larger retail space is being maintained,
both UK and also Ireland. So in Derry, the top shop has become a Waterstones. I
think it's a little bit of both. And it depends a lot on local need and the
market. But despite kind of the challenging times that we're seeing in retail,
these could be really exciting opportunities and could be a real way to
reinvigorate town centres. We heard those people in Harrogate though, didn't we?
It's lovely to have cafes and so on, but you also must have a good selection of
shops. Well, absolutely. It's about the things that we want and the things that
we need. We did see a massive increase in online shopping through the pandemic
out of almost necessity. But then a sharp drop as we started to reopen and that
sense in which we all want to be together. So we want to actually see and touch
and go into a store and try things on. It was also the case, I think, certainly
in the last year that with the postal strikes, but also the rising costs of
delivery, charging online shopping, charging for returns, that actually it's
easier to go in and shop in town centres. And actually we do that out of
necessity. I think we do need a mix of everything that definitely helps. In our
case in Canterbury, our former top shop is being converted to office space for
the city council and that's above ground floor, but the commercial units being
maintained at ground floor level. So that's a nice mix as well. Thanks so much,
Lisa Carlson. I'll have to stop you there, but thank you so, so much for coming
on. Just want to get a quick trail in for tomorrow. It's our phone in and you
can email us about it right now if you want to take part. You and yours at
bbc.co.uk. Our question is how are energy prices affecting you? As we've been
hearing on the programme today, most of us are still paying a lot, lot more than
we were for energy this time last year. We want to know how you've been coping
with the price rises this winter. Have you had to make changes to afford your
bills or are you okay? Have you been forced onto a prepayment meter? If you
have, how's it working out? Get in touch, you and yours at bbc.co.uk and please
leave us your phone number. You and Yours was produced by Tom Mosley. The studio
managers were Amy Brennan and Jonathan Esp. Let's have a look at the weather
forecast now and Susan Powell is with us. Hello, Susan. Thank you very much,
Tom. Good afternoon. A big area of high pressure centred to the north of
Scotland. It's going to dominate the weather across the UK this week. That
however doesn't mean it's all going to be blue skies and sunshine. Around our
area of high pressure at the moment, we have a notable north easterly wind and
it's picking up moisture off the North Sea and producing cloud and showers
across some central and eastern areas, particularly across England and Wales.
Our satellite picture across England and Wales at the moment looks a little bit
like a leopard print, if you like. A lot of white cloud with some holes punched
in it where we are seeing some sunny spells, but the thicker cloud is also
producing some showers. The most frequent showers this afternoon will persist
across the north east of England and the Midlands. I think we'll also see some
getting into the south east again with them tending to cluster, I think, across
the Essex and Kent areas. Fine for the west for Wales and the south west of
England. Yes, there will be some thicker cloud around from time to time, but I
think the likelihood of showers here is pretty small. In terms of temperatures,
the thermometer will indicate highs of nine or ten degrees, but that north
easterly wind direction, particularly at this time of year with the air coming
in off the North Sea, means it's going to feel closer to five or six, so
somewhat on the chilly side. For Northern Ireland, a fine afternoon in store
here, too. Quite a bit of cloud around with some holes forming from time to
time, allowing some glimmers of sunshine. Breezy highs for Northern Ireland of
six to eight degrees. For Scotland, a really large area of clear sky at the
moment towards the north west, extending across the Highlands, trying to push
into the Western Isles. Here as well, we'll see the best of the UK sunshine
overall today. Certainly some thicker cloud around further south and eastwards,
but essentially I think a fine afternoon to come for Scotland and the highs of
six to nine, but feeling colder in the wind. Overnight tonight, a chance of a
frost again where we have the clearest skies, particularly across Scotland and
to the south of the UK. And then for tomorrow, quite a bit of cloud around that
northeasterly breeze for many of us again. We are making changes to the way BBC
live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms, and the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC sounds. BBC sounds available now. On FM online.