TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 6 o'clock. This is Alan Smith. Good evening. The final report from
the inquiry into one of the worst terror attacks in living memory, the
Manchester Arena bombing, has found it might have been prevented if MI5 had
acted on key intelligence. The security service has said it's profoundly sorry.
The families of some of the victims have spoken of their pain. Those that played
any part in the murder of our children will never ever get forgiveness. From top
to bottom, MI5 to the associates of the attacker, we will always believe that
you all played a part in the murder of our children. In this bulletin we'll
examine in detail what MI5 knew and consider whether the inquiry has done its
job. Boris Johnson has broken his silence on Rishi Sunak's Brexit deal for
Northern Ireland, saying he'll find it very hard to vote for. Sue Gray, who led
the inquiry into lockdown parties at Downing Street, has left her civil service
job with the aim of becoming Sakhir Starmer's Chief of Staff. Also tonight,
anger grows in Greece about Tuesday's fatal train crash, Iran's investigating
the poisoning of hundreds of schoolgirls, and Wayne Shorter, one of the great
jazz composers, has died. The final report on the Manchester Arena bombing has
concluded that the security service MI5 missed a significant opportunity to take
action that might have prevented the attack, which killed 22 people in 2017. The
inquiry chairman, Sir John Saunders, found that the suicide bomber, Salman
Abedi, probably received assistance from someone in Libya, and that an MI5
officer failed to act swiftly enough on a key piece of information. Much of the
evidence for this part of the inquiry was heard in secret. Families of the
victims say they're disappointed they will never know the full truth of what
happened. From Manchester, here's our North of England correspondent, Judith
Moritz. Salman Abedi was the one who detonated the bomb which killed 22 people
at Manchester Arena, but this report says others also bear the responsibility.
Those who radicalised him, helping him make the device, and the agencies who
failed to stop him. The chairman of the Manchester Arena inquiry, Sir John
Saunders, spelled it out starkly. MI5 let Abedi slip through the net. There was
a realistic possibility that actionable intelligence could have been obtained
which might have led to actions preventing the attack. The reasons for this
missed opportunity included a failure by the security service, in my view, to
act swiftly enough. The bomb exploded in the foyer of the arena at the end of an
Ariana Grande concert. Teenagers were leaving, parents were waiting for their
children. The youngest to die was just eight years old. For the families of
those who died, the report's findings are hard to take. Caroline Currie's
19-year-old son, Liam, was one of those killed. Forgiveness will never be an
option for such evil intentions and those that played any part in the murder of
our children will never ever get forgiveness. From top to bottom, MI5 to the
associates of the attacker, we will always believe that you all played a part in
the murder of our children. The report is critical of what it calls willful
blindness about politicisation in the Didsbury Mosque the family attended. The
chairman, Fawzi Haffar, denied this was the case. I can tell you here and now,
there is no place for radicalisation or politics or any evil acts. No one can be
radicalised with a ten-minute sermon. There are no political meetings. I do not
care what people say. And we did not turn a blind eye. This was the third report
to come out of the public inquiry. The first looked at the planning ahead of the
concert, whilst the second concentrated on the response of the emergency
services. Greater Manchester Police were heavily criticised in both. Stephen
Watson, the chief constable, says the force is fully resolved to never repeat
the failings of the past. He spoke of what he called a fierce determination to
ensure the loss and hurt experienced by those still suffering will not be in
vain. Almost six years after the bombing, the inquiry is now over, but the
publication of this third report is only part of the story. Another document for
the eyes of the government, MI5 and counter-terrorism police has also been
compiled. These findings kept secret for reasons of national security. The Home
Secretary, Suella Bratherman, has said she's committed to working with MI5 and
the police to ensure that vital lessons are learned. The head of the security
service, Ken McCallum, has said he's profoundly sorry that MI5 did not prevent
the attack and has promised to engage fully with any recommendations that are
made in the report. Here's our security correspondent, Frank Gardiner. This
inquiry has rightly focused on the failures that led to the worst terrorist
attack in Britain since 2005. The police and emergency services have already
been criticised, but today it was MI5, the security service, that is accused of
missing significant opportunities that could, says the inquiry, have led to
actions that may have prevented the attack. For reasons of national security,
we're not told exactly what those opportunities were, but some of them are
obvious. The bomber, Salman Abedi, was already on MI5's radar and they knew he'd
left the UK for Libya. Yet no action was taken to stop and search him when he
returned just four days before his attack. Nor was he followed on his return,
something that might have led investigators to where he'd hidden the bomb. All
this despite his known contacts with a notorious Islamist radicaliser inside
Wakefield Prison. Today the Director-General, Ken McCallum, read out a statement
in response but refused to take questions afterwards. Gathering covert
intelligence is difficult, but had we managed to seize the slim chance we had,
those impacted might not have experienced such appalling loss and trauma. I am
profoundly sorry that MI5 did not prevent the attack. At the time, MI5 were
trying to monitor around 3,000 so-called subjects of interest and conducting
around 500 investigations. Today they say they put in place around 100
improvements and will study carefully the report's conclusions. But that is
likely to be of little comfort to the families of the victims of this appalling
attack. With the Inquiry's final report now published, our home editor Mark
Easton has this assessment of the findings. At the start of each of the three
volumes of the Manchester Arena Inquiry Report is an alphabetical list of the
names of the 22 who died. The individuals who were killed have always been at
the heart of this inquiry, Sir John Saunders wrote. The evidence has shown them
to be irreplaceable, unique people who lit up the lives of those around them. A
statutory public inquiry lasting two and a half years can become a forensic and
technical exercise, personal feelings easily squeezed out. But this inquiry has
consistently refocused on those who died and those who live with the
consequences of that terrible night. Sir John identified the failings of the
venue, emergency services and security services. The families have described the
possibility that the attack could have been thwarted as a devastating
conclusion. But they paid tribute both to Sir John and his team for their
unwavering determination to uncover the truth and also to those who had
supported them throughout. Yesterday the government announced it was setting up
a permanent expert panel to support victims after major disasters in England and
Wales. If the arena inquiry is about making sure lessons are learned, one of
those lessons is on how an inquiry can balance legal detachment with sympathy
and humanity. Boris Johnson has criticised Rishi Sunak's new Brexit deal for
Northern Ireland in his first public comment since the agreement was announced
on Monday. The former Prime Minister said he would find it very difficult to
vote for the Windsor framework as he believed it would act as a drag anchor on
divergence from the EU. Our political correspondent Ben Wright reports. While
most Tory MPs were bonding at an away day in Windsor, Boris Johnson was in
London making a speech, blowing a raspberry at his successor. Rishi Sunak's new
Brexit agreement for Northern Ireland replaces the deal Mr Johnson negotiated
with the EU. It removes barriers on trade across the Irish Sea and allows
politicians in the Stormont Assembly to potentially stop new EU laws applying in
Northern Ireland. Until now, almost no Tory MPs have publicly criticised the
deal. But Boris Johnson said it would be a drag anchor on the UK's ability to
diverge from EU laws and standards, undermining the point of Brexit. Mr Johnson
called for his controversial Northern Ireland protocol bill, which the EU argued
would breach international law, to be restored if the new deal does not work
out, a deal he suggested he might not support. I'm going to find it very
difficult to vote for something like this myself because I believed that we
should have done something different. No matter how much plaster came off the
ceiling in Brussels. And I hope that if it doesn't work, we will have the guts
to deploy that bill again. However, Mr Johnson also said he was conscious of the
political momentum behind Rishi Sunak's deal. Speaking on a visit to India, the
Foreign Secretary James Cleverley said he hoped the agreement would win the
backing of politicians in Belfast. We really, really believe that this deal
works well for the people of Northern Ireland, fully respects Northern Ireland's
integral place within the United Kingdom. And I really, really hope that that is
recognised by all the elected representatives in Northern Ireland, including the
DUP. At the moment, the Democratic Unionist Party and a group of Tory Brexit
hardliners at Westminster are considering their response to the deal. But with a
broad swathe of Mr Sunak's party supportive and Labour pledging to back it, the
deal looks almost certain to clear a Commons vote, despite the grumblings from
Boris Johnson. The senior official who carried out the inquiry into government
lockdown parties has resigned from the civil service. Sue Gray has been offered
the role of Chief of Staff to the Labour leader, Sikir Starmer. Here's our
political correspondent, Helen Catt. Sue Gray has long been viewed in
Westminster as an unimpeachable arbiter of standards. It was to Ms Gray, who's a
former head of Propriety and Ethics, that Boris Johnson's government turned to
produce the definitive report on Partygate. But her decision to resign from the
civil service after being offered the job with Labour has raised eyebrows.
Allies of Mr Johnson have reacted angrily. Jacob Rees-Mogg suggested it now
looked like Ms Gray's report was a left-wing stitch-up against a Tory prime
minister. The civil servants are asked to seek the advice of the appointment's
body, ACABA, when taking up a new role. It, in turn, advises the prime minister
to make the final decision on whether it is appropriate. However, there are no
powers to enforce the advice. A spokesman for the prime minister said they would
not comment further on an individual personal matter. A Cabinet Office
spokesperson has said it was reviewing the circumstances under which Ms Gray
resigned. The former health secretary, Matt Hancock, has accused the journalist
who leaked more than 100,000 messages linked to his handling of the pandemic of
a massive betrayal and breach of trust. The Daily Telegraph has published a
string of stories based on the correspondence, including details of a row within
Cabinet in late 2020 about whether schools should be closed. Isabel Oakeshott
has defended her decision to pass the messages onto the newspaper, insisting it
was in the overwhelming national interest. Here's our political correspondent,
Jonathan Blake. With the publication of more of Matt Hancock's messages has come
fresh scrutiny of big decisions with far-reaching consequences. It's also
prompted a bitter public row between the former health secretary and the
journalist who helped him write his book, Pandemic Diaries. Isabel Oakeshott has
admitted breaking a legal agreement by giving the messages to the Telegraph, but
denied she'd done it for money, saying instead it was about getting to the truth
in the national interest. This is about the millions of people, every one of us
in this country, that were adversely affected by the catastrophic decisions to
lock down this country repeatedly, often on the flimsiest of evidence for
political reasons. Matt Hancock accused her of a massive betrayal and breach of
trust. In a statement, he said there was absolutely no public interest case and
that all the materials for his book had been made available to the public
inquiry into the UK's response to the pandemic. Releasing them in this way, he
said, gave a partial biased account to suit an anti-lockdown agenda. The
messages appear to show Mr Hancock trying to bypass the then education
secretary, Sir Gavin Williamson, to close schools in England in December 2020,
predicting a policy car crash when he said kids would spread the virus the
following month. The school's minister, Nick Gibb, defended the government's
actions. Day by day, new evidence was emerging as the scientists were learning
about this virus and from that experience and those lessons, we were then taking
decisions about what to do in schools. But we did always want to do everything
we could to keep schools open. Other messages show Matt Hancock congratulating
Sir Gavin on what he described as a cracking announcement on exams. What a bunch
of absolute arses the teaching unions are, he said. Sir Gavin replied, I know,
they really, really do just hate work. He since said he was talking about some
unions and not teachers, who he said he had the utmost respect for. Geoff Barton
is the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders Union.
We were being seen as people who were the guardians of the nation's children and
young people. We were being seen as the people who would bring those young
people back in. And for those very people who put their head above the parapet
and did the right thing for the nation's children and young people, to be
sneered at in those terms, well, frankly, shame on them. Further messages
published by The Telegraph this afternoon suggest Boris Johnson considered
ending the first lockdown in 2020 earlier than planned, but was told it would go
against public opinion. The former prime minister feared he had blinked too soon
in announcing a second lockdown in November that year on the basis of data that
experts had told him was wrong. The row between Matt Hancock and Gavin
Williamson about whether schools should be open or closed took place several
months into the pandemic, during the second national lockdown. Our health
correspondent Nick Triggle looks back at the scientific guidance available to
ministers at the time. The WhatsApp debate happened in late December 2020, when
infections were rising. Behind the scenes, scientific advisers were torn. The
government advisory body SAGE made it clear if schools were to stay open, it
would be difficult to curb the rise in infections. But as always, it said there
were other considerations to take into account, including the impact on
children's education and wellbeing. Some of the scientists most closely involved
had suggested keeping just primary schools open. As the weeks passed, it also
became clear that that winter's peak may already have been reached, even as
ministers were arguing over WhatsApp. One of the things the modelling had failed
to do was take into account human behaviour. With infection rates rising over
Christmas, the public had already started to curb their mixing. Plenty of other
nations did close schools, but not necessarily for as long. Sweden kept most
pupils in class throughout. In the end, it came down to a judgement call, one
that had huge implications for children. You're listening to the 6 o'clock news
on BBC Radio 4, the main news so far. The final report from the inquiry into the
Manchester Arena bombing has said the attack might have been prevented had the
security services acted more swiftly on crucial intelligence. Boris Johnson has
said he'll find it very hard to vote for Rishi Sunak's Brexit deal for Northern
Ireland. Still to come… One of the great American jazz composers, Wayne Shorty,
has died. A coroner involved in the investigation into Greece's deadliest ever
train crash has told the BBC that at least 57 people are now known to have died
in the disaster. More than 350 passengers, mainly students returning from a
public holiday, were on board the intercity service from Athens to Thessaloniki
when it collided head-on with a freight train travelling in the same line. On
the site of the crash in central Greece, our Europe correspondent Nick Beek
reports. This is a tragedy which has played out in the foothills of Mount
Olympus, home to the gods in Greek mythology. Today's Greek government has been
quick to blame human error for the country's worst ever train disaster. But the
swift and simple explanation has caused rising anger. Plenty believe the crash
could have been avoided had decades of safety warnings been heeded. Today rail
workers across Greece walked out, affecting national services and the subway in
Athens. They claimed it was not safe for them to do their work. A 59-year-old
station master in Larissa, the city nearest the crash site, appeared in court
charged with manslaughter by negligence. Visiting a hospital nearby where
relatives of the missing had gathered, Zoe Rapti, Greece's deputy minister of
health, told the BBC her government wasn't to blame for the crash. It was a
personal mistake. This has been written and of course we will wait for the
police investigation to give us answers on that. Of course things should have
been done during these years, but of course Greece has faced a big economic
crisis for more than 10 years, which means that many things went back. The
station master has denied any wrongdoing, blaming the collision on a technical
fault. And there are claims he may be scapegoated to mask long-standing systemic
failings. The Greek government has promised an independent investigation, which
it insists will deliver justice for the victims and their families. Vladimir
Putin has said a Ukrainian sabotage group opened fire on civilians in southern
Russia in what he claims was a terrorist act. Russian officials reported that
the Bryansk region was attacked by a Ukrainian military drone and that saboteurs
had taken hostages. The Kremlin says the situation is now under control. The
details of what happened have not been verified. Ukraine has denied
responsibility. Will Vernon has more details. A murky incident today in Bryansk
region, near the border with Ukraine. The governor, Alexander Bogomaz, said that
a Ukrainian sabotage group had attacked a village. The Russian security service,
the FSB, said that its forces, together with the Russian military, were carrying
out an operation to eliminate Ukrainian fighters who had violated the border.
President Putin has cancelled a planned trip to Stavropol region in the south of
Russia. Via video link, the Kremlin leader called today's incident a terrorist
attack and promised to finish off those responsible. Since Russia launched its
invasion one year ago, Bryansk and other areas along the border with Ukraine
have been hit by shelling, drone attacks and explosions. Ukrainian officials
today denied their forces were responsible for the attack in Bryansk, calling it
a classic provocation by Russia. A special branch of the Iranian judiciary is to
investigate a wave of poisonings targeting girls' schools. The victims say they
suffered respiratory problems, nausea, dizziness and fatigue. Haram Gobardi from
our Persian service reports. Death to the child-killing regime. The chants of
people from their windows in Tehran last night. More than a thousand schoolgirls
in Iran have been poisoned across the country since November. At least 26
schools were attacked in six cities yesterday alone. The interior minister has
said nobody has been arrested yet. In a country where anyone opposing the regime
are normally detained immediately. Many Iranians suspect the toxic poisonings
are a deliberate attempt to prevent girls from going to school and revenge for
their role in anti-government protests that swept the country in September after
the killing of Mahsa Amini in police custody for her hijab. One 18-year-old
student from northwestern town of Ardabil says her school was one of the first
to join the anti-government protests and says she's been poisoned. It's emerged
that four of the seven people arrested in connection with the attempted murder
of a police officer in County Tehran have Protestant backgrounds. Detectives say
they still believe the shooting of Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell last
week was carried out by the dissident Republican group the New IRA. Mr Caldwell
remains critically ill in hospital. A lawyer for the former England cricket
captain Michael Vaughan has told a hearing that racism allegations made by his
team-mate Azeem Rafiq are word against word. The England and Wales Cricket Board
has been setting out cases against Michael Vaughan and a number of other former
players as part of an investigation into Yorkshire County Cricket Club. Our
sports editor Dan Roan was at the hearing. Michael Vaughan captained England to
ashes glory in 2005 but for the last two years his reputation and his career as
a BBC broadcaster have been in jeopardy after he was alleged to have used racist
language by a former Yorkshire team-mate Azeem Rafiq. Vaughan denies the claim
and today the two men came face to face at a disciplinary hearing. A current
England star Adeel Rashid has corroborated Rafiq's allegation and today he gave
evidence via live video link from Bangladesh where the team is currently on
tour. Asked by Vaughan's lawyer Christopher Stoner KC of his memory of the
alleged incident, Rashid claimed Vaughan had said, there's too many of you lot,
we need to do something about it. Mr Stoner suggested that Rashid did not have a
clear memory of events, which Rashid rejected, along with claims that he'd been
pressured into backing up Rafiq. However he did say that he didn't believe
Vaughan was a racist and that he believed the comments were a poor attempt at
humour. Rafiq was also cross-examined for the first time, accepting there had
been mistakes in the details he'd given between statements but insisting that
what Vaughan was alleged to have said is pretty clear and consistent. Vaughan
himself is set to give evidence on the third day of this hearing, the latest
episode in a saga that continues to cast a shadow over the game. Police who
found the body of a baby in woodland in Brighton yesterday have said they
believe the child may have been dead for some time. They've been unable to
confirm the baby's gender. A post-mortem examination is yet to be carried out.
Officers are continuing to question Constance Martin and Mark Gordon on
suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. They were detained on Monday after a
53-day search for the family. The Deputy First Minister of Scotland John Swinney
has said he will step down from government when Nicola Sturgeon leaves office
later this month. Mr Swinney has served as Finance Secretary and Education
Secretary during his 16 years in government. He'll remain the MSP for Perthshire
North. A pedestrian who shouted at a cyclist on a pavement in Cambridgeshire,
causing her to into the path of a car, has been jailed for three years for
manslaughter. A trial at Peterborough Crown Court heard how Celia Ward died
after she was struck by the vehicle moments after passing Oriol Grey on a shared
cycleway pavement in Huntingdon in October 2020. Howard Johnson reports. CCTV
footage showed Oriol Grey, who's 49, shouting at 77-year-old Celia Ward to,
''Get off the pavement!'', adding an expletive. Moments later, as she passed
Grey, Mrs Ward swerved off the pavement and into the path of a car. Jurors heard
the vehicle had no chance to stop or take avoiding action. Mrs Ward was
pronounced dead at the scene. Peterborough Crown Court was told that Grey, who
has cerebral palsy, left the scene before the emergency services arrived to buy
groceries at a supermarket. The judge said her actions had not been explained by
disability. He described the pavement as a shared path. Mrs Ward's husband of 53
years, David Ward, told the court that the clip of his wife's last moments would
haunt him forever. Oriol Grey's lawyer said she would file an appeal against the
sentence. An inquest has heard that the headteacher of Epsom College, Emma
Paterson, her seven-year-old daughter Letty, died from shotgun wounds. They are
believed to have been murdered by Emma Paterson's husband, George Paterson, at a
property on the school grounds. Surrey Coroner's Court heard Miss Paterson, who
was originally from Lincolnshire, died from shock, haemorrhage and shotgun
wounds. A man who flew a drone close to an aircraft in Derbyshire while
thousands of people were watching from the ground has been given a six-month
suspended prison sentence. Derby Crown Court heard that Mark Bagley used his
drone to film Buxton Carnival last July, despite knowing a hurricane was due to
make a flypast. The judge described his actions as mind-blowingly reckless. NHS
leaders have welcomed the government's decision to invite all health unions
involved in strikes to enter into pay talks. The NHS Confederation said it was a
step in the right direction and urged unions to accept what it said was an olive
branch. The Department of Health has said in order for the talks to start, all
planned strike action must be called off. Here's our health reporter, Catherine
de Costa. A group of 14 health unions in England, including those representing
ambulance staff, physios and midwives, has said it's waiting for more details
before deciding whether to enter formal pay talks with the government. Unions
have been ramping up industrial action in their fight to get above inflation pay
rises. Last week, the Royal College of Nursing called off a two-day strike after
agreeing to enter a period of intensive talks with ministers. The Department of
Health said it was happy to talk to all unions who were willing to discuss what
was fair and reasonable. But a three-day strike by junior doctors in England
looks likely to go ahead after representatives from the British Medical
Association described today's meeting with the Health Secretary Steve Barclay as
disappointing. Commission officials said with no new pay offer on the table, a
72-hour walkout would begin on 13 March. More than 3,000 bus drivers working for
National Express West Midlands voted to strike over pay from 16 March. The
company runs most local bus services in the West Midlands, including Birmingham,
Wolverhampton and Coventry. In the city, the 100-share index ended the day up 29
points at 7,944. On Wall Street a short time ago, the Dow Jones was up 105
points at 32,767. On the currency markets, the pound is trading at $1.194. And
against the euro, sterling is at 1.127. And that makes a euro worth 88.7 pence.
Wayne Shorter, one of America's greatest jazz saxophonists, has died. He was 89.
Wayne Shorter played with the likes of Miles Davis, Joni Mitchell and Carlos
Santana, and performed with the hugely successful 1970s fusion group Weather
Report. David Silito looks back at his life. In Weather Report, Wayne Shorter's
soaring tenor saxophone was part of the magic that turned the jazz fusion band
into a mainstream chart success. Born in New Jersey, he was part of three of
jazz's most celebrated combos. Pop Blakey's Jazz Messengers, Miles Davis's
mid-60s quintet with Herbie Hancock, and in 1970, Weather Report. He also helped
bring jazz into rock, recording with Stilly Dan, Carlos Santana and, here, Joni
Mitchell, who considered him a poetic, good spirit. 11 Grammys, a lifetime
achievement award, Wayne Shorter was jazz royalty. The headlines again. The
final report, produced by the Public Inquiry into the Manchester Arena bombing,
has found that MI5 failed to gather intelligence that might have prevented the
attack. The security service has said it's profoundly sorry. Families of victims
have accused MI5 of playing a part in the murder of their children. Boris
Johnson has warned he will find it very difficult to back Rishi Sunak's new
Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. The senior civil servant Sue Gray, who led the
inquiry into lockdown parties at Downing Street, has been offered a job as Chief
of Staff to the Labour leader, Sakeer Starmer. Matt Hancock has accused the
journalist Isabel Oakeshott of a massive betrayal after she leaked messages from
his time as Health Secretary, but she's insisted she acted in the public
interest. At least 57 people are now known to have died in Tuesday's train crash
in Greece. BBC News. Read by Alan Smith. Next this evening, the humorist David
Sedaris will be taking us back to 2020 and reflecting on a period of social
upheaval in his native United States. That's in just a moment. After the very
best in arts and culture with Front Row. I love when the theatre becomes
absolutely silent and they're like, what's happening? With live discussions,
news and reviews. It was extraordinary. I got very moved. And interviews with
the people creating and changing the world of arts around us. I pay a lot of
attention to lessons in the human condition that never cease to inspire me. Join
Tom Sutcliffe and me, Samira Ahmed, for Front Row. Some of the lines that I
write, I personally do actually really love. Live every Monday to Thursday
evening on Radio 4 at 7.15, with thousands of episodes now on BBC Sounds. And on
this evening's programme, we'll have reviews of the TV adaptation of the novel
Daisy Jones and the Six and Lucas Daunt's new film Close. That's at 7.15. Now on
Radio 4, true stories and occasionally forthright opinions with a transatlantic
angle. Ladies and gentlemen, meet David Sedaris. That was so kind of you to
applaud like that. This is an essay that I wrote called Fresh Caught Haddock.
When George Floyd was killed and seemingly overnight all of New York came to
smell like fresh plywood, I thought of Schenectady. Why there? My sister Amy
asked. She was with Hugh and me on the terrace of our apartment on the Upper
East Side of Manhattan. From where we stood, we could hear the roiling cauldron
20 stories below us. Sirens, shouting, the distant sounds of breaking glass, all
blended together into a furious, muffled roar. Years ago, I was on a plane
seated next to a middle-aged black woman who was reading a Bible, I began. I was
working a crossword puzzle and said to the flight attendant, a white guy, not
just gay, but a queen, excuse me, but do you know how to spell Schenectady? He
told me he had no idea. Just as I was sort of hating him for it, the woman with
the Bible said S-C-H-E-N-E-C-T-A-D-Y. She spelled it with her eyes shut, maybe
to prove that she wasn't cheating. Amy spat an olive pit into her palm. Oops,
exactly, I said. Why hadn't I turned to her in the first place? I told myself
I'd asked the flight attendant because it was his job to serve me. But how true
was that, really? Did I ask him because he was white or because he wasn't
reading a Bible? What does that have to do with anything, Amy asked. I shrugged,
I don't know, I guess I think that people who read Bibles on planes aren't all
that smart. I don't know that being smart really plays into it, Amy said. I'm
sure there are plenty of dummies in Schenectady who have no problem spelling
their town's name. I mean, it's part of their address. She dropped the olive pit
into a planter Hugh had just filled with pansies. I can't spell Minneapolis or
Minnesota. Does that make me stupid? I said yes. She sighed. I know, I'm an
idiot. Hugh headed indoors to make fresh drinks for himself and Amy. I could
have spelled Schenectady for you. Yeah, well, you weren't there, were you, I
said. You're never there when I really need you. He and I had just returned from
two weeks at the C-section, our house on Emerald Isle. The New York we'd left
behind us had already been changed by COVID-19, but now that we'd returned it
felt doubly different. For the first time since February, the virus was no
longer the only news. The unrest was. The country had gone from one massive
headline story to another, and it felt like anything might happen next, a
cataclysmic natural disaster, an alien invasion. If I was overreacting, it was
because New York had borne a bigger brunt of the year 2020 than many other
places. North Carolina, for instance. The coronavirus never happened on Emerald
Isle, I told Amy. Or okay, it almost didn't happen. At the grocery stores,
hardly anyone had a mask on. Same at the Dairy Queen. Coming from Manhattan,
where we can't leave the house without our faces covered, it was a real, I'd
plan to say, shock. But what came out instead was vacation. I want to go, Amy
said. And so we made plans to return in a few weeks with her and her friend
Adam. In the meantime, shops were being looted, and there were almost nonstop
local protests, the moods of which varied from peaceful to confrontational. Five
months earlier, I'd been in Hong Kong and asked people about the pro-democracy
demonstrations there, surprised to learn that if you lived in certain parts of
town and avoided your television, you could easily know nothing about them. That
was certainly not the case in New York, where no matter your neighborhood, the
protests were impossible to ignore. I walked downtown the day after Amy came for
dinner and fell upon a crowd that had gathered in Union Square. A number of
people had signs, but before I could make them out, I was stopped by a young
woman with green hair who wanted to hand me a plastic bottle. Water, sir? I
shook my head no. How about some hand sanitizer? Or I have chips if you need a
little something to eat. I guessed she was a college student and assumed she was
selling these things, but no, it seemed that they were free. That's all right, I
said, but thanks. The crowd at the southern edge of the park wasn't doing
anything in particular. Some of the people who had signs were hoisting them with
no apparent sense of urgency in the direction of the police, who formed a ragged
line on the other side of 14th Street, talking amongst themselves. Protest-wise,
it seemed like a good place to get started. So I went to Amy's and returned with
her half an hour later, noting as we wandered into the throng, we look like
we're searching for our children. Everyone was probably more like it, as we were
by far the oldest people I saw. Water? An earnest woman with pigtails asked. Do
you want some pretzels? Something to keep your blood sugar up? Need a list of
the local bathrooms? Another student-aged person asked, offering me a clearly
marked map. This was nothing like what the TV news had been showing. Here there
were no crowbars, just candy bars, and chips and Cheetos and dried fruit slices.
Are you sure I can't give you a little something to eat? Asked the dogged young
snacktivist. I reckon there were maybe 300 people in the park. Signs included
white silence, no more. Defund NYPD. No excuse for abuse. And BLM. An
abbreviation for Black Lives Matter. A person I couldn't see was beating a drum,
and while it felt like something should kick off, nothing did. Every so often
applause would break out, though I was never sure why. It's just a gathering,
really, the young woman standing next to me explained. She had a ring in her
nose. And like most everyone else around us, she was white. It's an odd spot to
occupy, the ally. On some website that morning I'd watched a video of two
identical-looking blondes spray painting I Can't Breathe on the facade of a
Starbucks in Los Angeles. What are you doing? A black protester shouted. That's
something I'm going to get blamed for, my people. Who asked you for your help
anyway? The girls stopped, but only because they were finished. In another
video, a white guy with silver hair was using a pick, the sort gold miners hoist
in movies, to break up paving stones he could hurl at the police. A black
protester intervened, saying, much like the woman in LA had, that he was going
to get blamed for it. But the guy with the pick continued until he was tackled
to the ground by the black fellow and a few of his friends, who subsequently
delivered him to the very cops he'd intended to stone. I thought I'd support the
movement the way I had become accustomed to, by donating money and then telling
people I'd donated twice as much. The moment I sent off my contributions, I saw
the protest differently, for now I had done something and could feel superior to
those who hadn't. In the early days of the protest, it was looting, and the news
coverage made me anxious. My fear was that my favorite stores would be emptied,
and that when the city finally opened back up again after the COVID
restrictions, there'd be nothing left for me to buy. Amy shared my concerns, so
we left Union Square and walked to Soho, where two of the shops we most cared
about were located. Both were boarded up, but I wasn't sure if it was
preventative or the result of smashed windows. It's not like I really need
anything, I said sulkily as we headed back uptown. Neither of us had ever gone
so long without shopping. Close to a hundred days it had been, and I wasn't
quite sure who I was anymore. When my agent's birthday rolled around, I wound up
giving her two bottles of wine and a gift card from a pharmacy she likes. Those
are like presents that Lisa would come up with, I said to Amy. She's not
necessarily cheap, our sister, just unimaginative. And cheap. There were just so
many questions I wanted answered. How, for instance, did people find the shoe
style they were looking for, let alone the proper size, when looting big Nike
stores? You're an amateur, wandering around a massive, probably dark stock room
with ten minutes at most, while the sales clerks, who are pros, seem to need
twice that amount of time, I said to Amy. Just then we ran into a protest march,
an actual moving one. It was headed our way, west on Houston Street, so we
joined it. Again, it was hard to estimate the crowd size, a thousand people,
more? Social distancing was in practice, sort of, and most everyone I saw had
the lower half of their face covered. In this particular case, I actually
welcomed my mask, as it relieved some of the pressure of chanting, which is
something I have never been comfortable with. It's the same with prayer and the
Pledge of Allegiance. I even lip-sync, Happy Birthday. So I was glad that my
mouth was obscured and no one could see whether or not I was joining in. I said,
Hey, hey, ho, ho, racist cops have got to go, the crowd shouted, as Amy and I
merged into it. This template has been around since the 1950s and has to be my
least favorite. True, it can easily be tailored to any cause, but you always
know the word that's going to rhyme with ho will be go. It's lazy. Next came,
Whose streets? Our streets. And it was NYPD suck my dick. And I'm not sure how I
feel about that one. Is someone performing fellatio on you really the greatest
punishment you can imagine? I wanted to ask. Black Lives Matter followed next.
And then we were back to Whose streets? Our streets. It's always interesting to
watch a chant die, like a match going out. Some can burn for decent stretches of
time, but with this crowd, there appeared to be a strict 45-second policy.
Everyone seemed to have their phones out, and I noticed a lot of people taking
selfies. This struck me as vulgar. But what isn't a background for an Instagram
post anymore? I know that people are now taking pictures of themselves at
funerals because when I looked up selfies at funerals was the third option
Google gave me. I clicked on it, aghast to find mourners posing beside the
caskets of their dead friends and relatives. Some people had their thumbs up.
Meaning what exactly? Great embalming job. Great death. The march moved west and
then turned north onto LaGuardia Place. It bottlenecked at Washington Square
Park, so Amy and I took our leave. I walked her home and then continued on foot
to my place, another 53 blocks north. As the days passed and the marches became
ubiquitous, I grew to think of them much the way I do about buses and subways.
I'll just take this BLM down to 23rd Street. The people were friendly, the
snacks plentiful, and it felt good to walk in the middle of the avenue. At 23rd,
I might wait an hour or so before catching another BLM back home or cross town
to the west side. While marching, I'd look at the people around me and wonder
what they were thinking. It's like at the symphony. I always assumed that the
audience was comparing this rendition of, say, Mahler's Second to a superior
one. Then I started asking around and learned that people were entertaining the
same crazy thoughts I was. How long would it take me to eat all of my clothes?
Not the zippers and buttons, but just the fabric. If I had to do it in six
months, could I? If you shredded a sport coat very finely and added half a cup
to, say, stuffing, would your body even notice it? I felt sure that while
marching, everyone around me thought of racism and of the many black Americans
who have been killed by the police over the years. We who were white likely
considered our own complicity, or rather we touched on it briefly, that exposed
wire, before moving on to other people who were much worse than we were. But
then the time stretched on and our thoughts strayed, didn't they? Something I
thought of one afternoon, marching uptown with a sizable crowd, was a well-known
movie actor who had contacted me almost 30 years earlier when Hugh and I lived
in Soho. He wanted me to come by his house to discuss a possible collaboration,
and I was flattered, for I had never met anyone famous. It was snowing, and
almost three feet had accumulated by the time I left my apartment. The actor
didn't live far from me, half a mile maybe, but getting to his house was a real
pain, given my short legs and the waterproof boots I didn't have. I arrived to
find his two young children, a boy and a girl, in the dining room, being served
by a thin black woman whose hair was covered with a do-rag. She said hello to me
as we passed by, and I noticed the steam coming off the soup she was setting
down. You're lucky she came to work in weather like this, I said to the actor,
as we made our way to the living room. And on a Saturday, no less, he offered a
thin smile, actually, that's my wife. My face still burns to think of this. But
if nothing else, it taught me a lesson. From that day on, whenever I go to
someone's house and see a person of a different race working either inside or
outside, I say, is that your husband? Or how come you make your wife do all the
cleaning? They always answer, Conchita, my wife? She's like 20 years older than
me and has four kids. Plus, I'm already married to a man. Eventually, though,
I'll be right. And my host will say, may I just thank you for being the one
person in my life who's not a horrible racist. As the weeks passed, I saw more
and more protest signs reading, defund the police. That won't be doing us much
good come election time, I thought, worried how this would play on Fox News. The
left wants it so that when armed thugs break into your house and you dial 911,
you'll get a recording of rich homie Quan laughing at you. Amy worried, too. It
wasn't taking money allocated for law enforcement and redirecting it towards
social services that bothered her. Rather, it was the language and how Trump
would use it to scare people. He'd already started, and I imagined that leading
up to the election, he would just keep hammering at it. Then there were all the
statues being pulled down, Amy said, when she and Adam arrived on Emerald Isle.
I thought it would be nearly impossible, that they were like screwed into the
ground or something. But I guess all you need is some really good rope and a
dozen or so really mad people. Mad, strong people, Adam added. I'm not sure the
general public really pays all that much attention to statues, I said. Don't you
think you could come in the night and replace General Brexton Bragg's head with
that of, say, Whoopi Goldberg, and it would take months for anyone to notice?
Don't most of us see a bronze figure on a pedestal and think simply statue? Amy
guessed that I was right. For those few exceptions who pay closer attention, you
could keep the monument and change the plaque, I said. It could read something
like, Chester Beauregard, Jr., unfortunate blacksmith who bore a striking
resemblance to the traitor General Braxton Bragg. My friend, Asya, who is
Jewish, thought otherwise when I brought up the issue on the phone the next day.
If there were statues of famous Nazis around, even ones with replaced heads and
nameplates, I still wouldn't want to pass them every day, she said. I mean, ugh,
what a slap in the face. I see her point. To those upset about the monuments
that were recently toppled, I guess I'd say, look, time's changed. Jefferson
Davis overlooked your godforsaken traffic circle for 100 years. Now we'll put
them in storage and make it someone else's turn for a while. Who could argue
with that, I asked my friends, John and Lynette, who have a house not far from
the C-section. I thought the streets in our neighborhood were named after the
developers' children, but it seems I was wrong. That's Lee Avenue, as in Robert
E., John said. Stewart Avenue, as in Jeb. Jackson, as in Stonewall. When I
repeated this to Amy, she said, what about Scotch Bonnet Drive? That's after
General Jedediah Scotch Bonnet, I told her. Then there was a street called Coon
Crossing. A year earlier, I might have thought nothing of it, but everything was
getting a second look now. I was surprised to learn that John and Lynette's
neighborhood in Raleigh, Cameron Village, was now simply called the Village
District. This because the Cameron it was named after had been a plantation
owner. This made me wonder about the men behind my elementary and high schools.
Who was E.C. Brooks? Jesse Sanderson. In the meantime, Uncle Ben's Rice was now
called Ben's Original. The box was still orange, but there was no longer a face
on it. Eskimo Pies disappeared as well. I was fine with all this Black Lives
Matter stuff, till they went after both Aunt Jemima and Mrs. Butterworth, our
friend Burmy said. Now I'm like, hey, don't mess with my syrup. One of the many
shops on the island that sells inflatable rafts and inexpensive clothing had a
Confederate flag beach towel in its window. I saw a fair number of those in
eastern North Carolina. Some were discreet, a decal on a windshield, and others
were loud, full-sized standards billowing in front of houses, often beside a
Trump flag, or affixed to massive pickup trucks that would tear up and down the
main road. The trucks were unnaturally high off the ground, and most often had
jacked-up front wheels that were made to look like they were forever going
uphill. Carolina Squats, they were called, or Bro-Dozers. Their mufflers had
been modified as well, or perhaps they'd been removed altogether. Americans
roared as if to say, asshole coming through. Should there be any doubt that the
driver was insecure regarding his masculinity, one could often find a pair of
lemon-sized testicles dangling from the trailer hitch. Lord, son, Burmy said
when astonished I described them to him. You ain't never seen truck nuts? I was
eight when we moved south from New York. It was the first time I heard the words
Yankee and Rebel. In school, at Cub Scouts, in the country club, you were either
on one side or the other. People who win the war move on. People who lose turn
their flags into beach towels and hang hard rubber testicles from their bumpers.
They make it easy for the rest of us to hide. Over there, we say, pointing to a
Bro-Dozer with a Confederate flag affixed to it. That's what a racist looks
like. When I was in seventh grade, I acted as a campaign manager for Dwight
Bunch, one of the three black students at Carroll Junior High. He ran for class
president and won with my brilliant slogan, we like Dwight a bunch. Two years
later, our school was desegregated. Fights broke out in the parking lot. My
friend Ted had his nose broken with a Coke bottle. In our twenties, we both
dated a number of black guys, which I always thought made us the opposite of
racists. I didn't have sex with them because of their color, but just because
they were there and willing. Now, I was reading that sleeping with black guys
meant you were racist, that you were exoticizing them. Everything was suspect
and everywhere you turned, there was an article titled, blanks, race problem. It
could be about anyone, an actor who'd never had a co-star of color, a comedian
who used the word Negro 20 years ago. The articles were always written by white
people in their early twenties. I saw the phrase POC, white passing, in the
signature of an email someone sent and wondered how long that had been a thing.
Reckoning was the word I kept hearing. It was time for a racial reckoning. We
stayed at the beach for two weeks and returned to New York just as the protests
had petered out into bike riding opportunities. Flash mobs of predominantly
white people would pedal up the avenues, 3000 strong, blocking traffic,
chanting, whose streets? Our streets. And occasionally, black lives matter, but
strangely, in a sing-songy way. The way a fisherman might call fresh caught
headache. I came upon a bike march one Saturday afternoon, the last day of
spring at around five o'clock. People lined Third Avenue, most raising their
phones to shoot pictures and videos or to turn their backs on the cyclists and
take selfies. Beside me stood two white girls in their early twenties, both
frantically texting. Both had tans. Where can we get bikes, one asked the other.
She tugged down her mask and commenced filming herself. Black lives matter, she
shouted. Woo! How do I get across, asked a frail-looking elderly woman who had
suddenly appeared beside me. Her rust-colored wig was pulled down low on her
forehead and she wore a sun visor. In her hand was a heavy-looking bag from the
nearby drugstore. To wait until these people are done, snapped one of the suntan
girls. I, who of course needed to pee, was wondering the same thing. How might I
cross? How do I, how do all of us get to the other side? We do have a few
minutes here if anybody has any questions. You don't have to, you can bring the
lights up a bit. There we go. Oh yes, you have a question. Hi, I wanted to ask
about languages. I read in your books that you often learn a bit of the language
when you go to another country. What's your favorite language to speak and is it
worth the bother of learning something before you go? Well, Hugh and I are going
to Japan in a few weeks and I've been studying Japanese hard. And I'll say
something to Hugh, I'll say, oh did you know that this is how you say, and he
says, we're only going for four days. And that's true, but I don't know, it just
makes the trip so much richer. And sometimes Hugh and I will be sitting there
and I'll say, the person at the next table said three. I think she's been
married three times. But what's fascinating to me about this new program that
I'm studying is that there are questions like, who is his husband? Is that her
wife by the door? They don't have same sex marriage there. But it's just trying
to impose it, you know, the language program. And my friend Mike is using the
same program for Yiddish. And one of the phrases that it taught him was, my
uncle is a broken man. And also it taught him, who here smells like fish? Yes. I
just wanted to share with you an anecdote from this afternoon. I was trying to
tell my son who I was going to see this afternoon and I said, I'm going to see
an American essayist. And he said, they let Americans into the SAS? Please let
that make the radio show. Meet David Sedaris was written and read by David
Sedaris. The producer was Steve Doherty and it was a Giddy Goat production for
the BBC. And there it was, it made the cut. David will be back with more stories
at the same time next week. And straight to another storyteller, Chelsea will be
spinning a good historical yarn in the Archer's next this evening, just after
the news. Six Music. The year is 1978. Kate Bush releases her seminal debut
album, The Kick Inside. And on the record's 45th anniversary, we're celebrating
the icon that is Kate Bush. Six Music's deep dive into The Kick Inside. You can
find archive interviews and exclusive performances, as well as playlists and
programs featuring artists she's inspired. She was in her own world that she had
created herself. Way, way ahead of their time. For all this and more, open BBC
Sounds, click the music tab and scroll to find Kate Bush on every Facebook page.