TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Starting next Friday morning at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at 6
o'clock on Saturday 25th February. This is Viginalis. Good morning. Talks
between the UK and the European Union are intensifying as both sides try to
secure a New Deal on post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland.
Downing Street has described the negotiations as positive but an announcement on
changes to the Northern Ireland protocol has been delayed repeatedly. The
current agreement requires checks on goods arriving in Northern Ireland from
other parts of the UK. Here's our political correspondent David Wallace-
Lockhart. The DUP, Northern Ireland's main unionist party, wants to see
significantly less EU oversight. There are signs that a New Deal is close.
Rishisounak has spoken with retailers and business representatives. The Foreign
Secretary James Cliverley has pulled out of a long planned trip to the Middle
East at the beginning of next week. While alterations to the protocol seem
imminent, it may be difficult for Rishisounak to get the type of wholesale
change that the DUP and some in his own party are looking for. A fifth man has
been arrested in connection with the shooting of an off-duty police officer in
County Tyrone. Two gunmen fired several shots at Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell at a sports complex in Oma on Wednesday. He remains in a critical but
stable condition. Investigators say their main line of inquiry is the dissident
Republican group the New IRA. Health officials in the UK have begun drawing up
contingency plans for a possible bird flu pandemic. The move comes after the
death of an 11-year-old girl from the H5N1 train of the disease in Cambodia. The
UK Health Security Agency says that very high levels of transmission in wild
birds presents a constant threat but it has no evidence that the virus is
becoming more easily passed to humans. Tens of millions of people in Nigeria are
heading to the polls today to vote for a new president. The election is being
seen as one of the most unpredictable in recent years with three leading
candidates instead of two. Here's our West Africa correspondent Myeny Jones.
There's nervous anticipation on the streets of Lagos, Nigeria's commercial hub.
In supermarkets shoppers stocked up on essentials as there's an election day
curfew from midnight to 6pm with non-essential workers only allowed out to go to
the polls. There are 18 candidates in the presidential race. The free front
runners are the ruling parties Bo La Tinubu, former Vice President Atikwa
Bubakar and the surprise story of the campaign Peter Orby. He's offered an
unprecedented third alternative for those, especially young people, who are
frustrated with the two parties who run the country for the past 24 years.
Hundreds of objects from a sunken 17th century warship are going on display in
Norwich today for the first time. Dozens of people died when the Gloucester hit
a sandbank off the Norfolk coast. Among the survivors was the Duke of York who
went on to become King James the Second. Joe Black has seen footage of its
discovery released by Norfolk Historic Shipwrecks. The Gloucester ran aground
off the coast of Norfolk in 1682 and her discovery by two brothers from Norwich
has been described as the most important maritime find since the Mary Rose.
Although much of the ship has submerged in sand, the footage shows a rope, a
cannon, a wine bottle and the tip of one of the anchors. Among the hundreds of
artefacts brought to the surface are the ship's bell, personal possessions such
as spectacles and even a silk petticoat which was discovered in a chest. Today
items will go on public display at the Castle Museum in Norwich. Cricket and
England have taken control on day two of the second test against New Zealand.
They declared on 435 for eight with Joe Root making 153 not out. In reply, the
home side was struggling on 138 for seven when rain stopped play. Now with the
weather, here's Louise Lear. Good morning all. Quite a quiet weekend of weather
ahead as high pressure once again dominates the scene. So it's going to be a
bright but frosty start for many of us. There'll be a lot of sunshine around but
favoured spots for that is the further west you are. The reason being we've got
a north-easterly wind today gusting in excess of 40 miles an hour and so along
the east coast that will continue to drive in more cloud and a few scattered
showers. And because the wind direction is coming from a north-easterly it's
noticeably colder so that means with any elevation some of those showers could
have quite a wintry mix in there across the peaks and the Pennines in
particular. So in terms of the feel of the weather we're looking at five to
seven degrees across Scotland eight to nine degrees elsewhere. That's about
average for the time of year but it will feel just a little bit colder because
of the strength of the wind. Lighter winds and more sunshine to look forward to
tomorrow. Enjoy. Louise, thank you very much. Now look at the morning's papers.
Several papers report that Rishi Sunak is on the verge of announcing a new
Brexit deal. The Guardian says the agreement would overhaul post-Brexit trading
arrangements for Northern Ireland bringing to an end a two-year standoff with
the European Union. The Daily Telegraph reports that a legal text could be
presented to Parliament as soon as Monday but the paper says it's not yet known
whether the deal will be accepted by the Democratic Unionist party. According to
The Times, Rishi Sunak is prepared to publish the agreement with or without the
DUP's endorsement. Some of the front pages picture events held to mark the first
anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine. The Financial Times shows women
paying their respects in a cemetery in the western city of Lviv. The paper's
main story focuses on more sanctions being announced against Moscow amid what
the FT says are mounting concerns about the role China is playing in the Russian
war economy. A mother's plea for her daughter's killer to be blocked from
leaving prison is the main story for the Daily Mail. The paper says the man,
Robert Brown, is due for automatic release in November after serving half of his
26-year jail term for manslaughter. Diana Parks tells the Mail he still poses a
risk to her family and the public and she wants the Justice Secretary, Dominique
Rabe, to intervene. A Ministry of Justice spokesman tells the Mail that Mr Rabe
will do everything in his power to keep the most dangerous offenders behind
bars. The Daily Express credits the Queen Consort with forcing Roald Dahl's
publisher to announce that the author's books will be printed in their original
form. The paper says Camilla was shocked and dismayed about the removal of
portions that could cause offence. The Daily Mirror and The Daily Star say some
shops have run out of turnips after the Environment Secretary, Therese Coffey,
suggested them as a way of getting around shortages of other fruit and veg. The
Mirror says the minister's advice sparked a run on the root vegetable. Recalling
that turnips were the favourite food of the Blackadder character, Baldrick, the
star has the headline, Not such a cunning plan, milady. And that's a look at
this morning's papers. This is BBC Radio 4. Now Claire Balding heads to South
Wales for ramblings. It is a glorious winter's day. Honestly, the best day that
we have had for this series and one of the... I love doing the winter series
because hardly anyone's around and if you get a day like this it feels magical
and even if you come to a really popular spot and I have done today, I'm in
Waterfall Country in the Brecon Beacons just north of Mirtha Tidwell. It's fresh
but it's not too cold. There's barely any wind, the birds are singing, the trees
are completely silhouetted against a blue sky, leaves not yet apparent and it
just feels fresh and invigorating. And Roger and Sam are with me. And this
really is a love story as much as it is a walk but this place is special and we
haven't even got to the good bit yet. No, we haven't, not yet. Yeah, this is one
of our favourite places to be. We do it quite regularly, don't we? It was the
first place we ever met, wasn't it? It is, yeah. It is. But it's just something
about it. We do a lot of cold water swimming as well so there's always nice
little private areas that you can find. You have the main waterfalls of course
but we go off the beaten track sometimes and we always find a nice little
private spot. Most occluded spots, aren't they? Yeah. Well the Brecon Beacons is
vast. It's 520 square miles. There's something like 1200 miles of walking routes
but I know that in the summer this spot becomes almost unbearably busy so I'd
really recommend visiting it off peak. Yes, definitely. 100% that's the best
times to do it. Definitely. But whenever you've had, it's always different, it
always looks different. You always get a different perspective and you're always
feeling really grateful. But that's how I feel anyway. You said this is where
you first met, how? So we're part of a walking group on Facebook. It's actually
how we met. She asked for the postcode for a free parking. It was here, yeah. So
we decided to meet up for a walk, just as like-minded people, weren't it? Yeah,
definitely. We were just into the same things so we decided that we would meet
up as friends initially. Well, that's all we wanted. And so yeah, we met up here
and went for a walk. We decided that we would do a deck as well. And that was
November, November 2021. So yeah, it was quite cold but we took one of those
Swedish candles. Swedish candles, yeah. What's that then? It's basically like a
block of wood but it's got almost like a natural fire layer inside. So they burn
outwards. So it just gives you warmth really. Yeah, you brought it along and I
was a bit like you. What's that? But since we've used it quite a few times and
it's very handy when you come out the water just to warm up. But yeah, so we're
right here and we started chatting. We've talked a lot. We've got so much in
common. And we just had on doing our little meetups but it was quite funny
because the time that we decided that it could possibly be a bit more than
friendship and we thought there's going to be a date now. We decided to meet.
Have you heard of the diving board? It's near Penavan. It's got a thing called
the diving board on it. It's just a rock that outfaces so you can like stand on
it and look over. Just look after the valley. It's an amazing view. What happens
then at the diving board? It's a first date. We actually met on different
mountains because I thought the diving board was somewhere else. So we did our
own individual walk. We did our usual solo walk. So we rang her a few times and
I don't know. I'm definitely here. You're not? Because I am. Yeah, so what was
that? Hour and a half I reckon. We had our own solo walks. We did. Yeah. And
then we met up after. Yeah, I enjoyed it. It was a nice walk. We eventually met
at the bottom in between the two at the cafe. We're heading steeply downhill
into the woods and you can hear in the distance a rush of one of the four
waterfalls because this is known as the four waterfalls walk. Is it a circular
route? I want to say circle. It goes off around and bends and stuff like that.
But it's a pretty easy walk to do. It's nice because it's got quite easy paths.
They're wise. They're not particularly treacherous. There's some bits that are
steep. The steepest parts and the most challenging parts are the steps down to
the falls and coming back up them you need good leg muscles for. Yeah. Because
they are quite steep. And this is not somewhere you would go for a swim, is it?
Yes. We have dipped in the four falls. Oh, okay. Is that... Were you planning to
do that today? No. No, no, no. Okay. You're all good. Not today. Not today, no.
Do you know there's a science to why the air around waterfalls is good for us?
And it's to do with negative ions and negative ions are a good thing. Okay. And
so even way back, someone like Samuel Taylor Coleridge, the poet, who suffered
from really bad depression, he found walking in and around waterfalls to be
particularly beneficial. And it genuinely is because the air is broken up by the
water and it changes the nature of the air around you. So if you're here for a
good half hour, it will have a massive cost of effect. Oh, I know that it has an
effect with meditation. So you can walk into a waterfall and not get hypnotized,
but almost get intermeditated. Yeah, state. Yeah. It's very calming and you
don't know that everything that's around you and you just focusing on being
present in the moment. It's the best time. Did you want to go and have a look
down here? From this angle, we can see the water dropping down hugely steeply,
ledges of rock. And there is an upturned tree, the whole of it, roots heading up
the water ball that is right in the middle that's been washed down there. But
that first drop must be 12, maybe 15 feet. And then the next one, more like 16,
17. I think as well as the scientific side of it, of the air being different
because the water changing the molecules, it's the presence of that force and
that natural force of water. I think that makes you feel different inside. Yeah.
So for me, it kind of makes me realize just how small I am in the world. How
much natural beauties are around me that I think a lot of people take for
granted. Me included. The pause at this spot, having just come over the bridge
because the stream turns and is about to head towards the waterfall and start
its first major descent. But here it's just beautifully, it's moving obviously,
but it's not rushing, it's not frantic. It's really quite clear as well today.
In the summer this is where a lot of people come to just play about really. It's
a good place for children because it's quite shallow. And actually, I know there
have been issues around here. Again, be careful, just respect the water as well.
Yeah. And you have to think about as much as obviously when there's been heavy
rainfall and that's when the waterfalls look their most magnificent. But it can
be so dangerous, so slippery. Every time you come out to places like this, you
have to be aware that there's going to be a risk. You are going to take a risk
every time. There are freak accidents and tragedies that happen. And there are
lots of boards up, warning on the safety side of things. But I mean, it is open.
They've got signs, but if you were going to go against those signs, then... It's
your risk, isn't it? Yeah. There's only so much people you can do. And also
there's always that balance between wanting places to stay on the spot. So you
don't want signs and fences and cordoned off the areas. The beauty of it is it's
the fact that it is natural. Yeah, definitely. Yeah. So we're going to head up
these steps. The path gets much narrower here, so we'll go single-front. And
just because of the time of year, what's lovely about this is being able to
constantly look up towards the sky and being able to see right through the
branches of the trees. And Roger, had you always been an outdoorsy kind of chap?
What was your childhood like? I used to get made to go on walks when I was a kid
by my parents, which obviously stuck with me. I'm happy as long as the walk's a
good walk, really. It's not destroyed and mankind haven't taken them completely
over it then. Happy with any walk, really. I haven't really got a plan, have we?
No. Just do whatever comes to mind, really, isn't it? At the time. We've got a
time limit with the school run, which usually we go on our walks when the
children are in school. And what age are the kids now? So I've got a six-year-
old and an eight-year-old. And Roger, your kids are? Seven and ten. Oh gosh. So
they're all simulators. Yeah. They all get on, so it's a lot of boys for me. Is
it four boys? Four boys. Wow. But isn't that funny with all the dating apps and
the different ways in which you might have met, and actually both having two
kids at the same age would have been a common factor. But actually what did it
was just both happening to be in a walking group. Yeah, that's a natural way of
progressing. Well, that's the thing. We weren't looking to be in any kind of
relationship at all at the time that we met. And it was purely based on
friendship at the start. It was. It was just, you know, constrain on our self-
care and not others around us, really. I think it's helpful when you've got less
pressure. You know, when you go on a dating app and you expect them to date, and
then there's expectations. And there was none of that with us. So it was just
enjoying each other's company and getting to know one another in the most
natural surroundings that we could find. You're listening to ramblings on Radio
4 and BBC Sounds. And today I'm in the Brecon Beacons walking the Four
Waterfalls Walk with Samantha Chapman and Roger Taylor. And we've been
discussing how the two of you met here. You know, they say when you know, you
know. But it is like that. It is an actual thing, yeah. When you know, you do
know. Because we didn't think it would ever happen, really, did we? No. It's how
similar we are. We are literally the same person in female and male form. Just
didn't realise that a relationship could flow so easily. You know? I think as
you get older and you've gone through different things in your life, and you
kind of just expect certain things to be a certain way. And you accept them.
You're like, well, it's bound to be like that because I'm, you know, the age I
am and there's been a running theme all my life. But it was completely
different. Completely different. It was effortless. Go through lessons done you
in previous relationships to then find what you actually want and what you
deserve really more than anything. And I think you learn a lot about yourself as
well. And actually knowing what makes you stressed and avoiding it is a really
important part of life. And knowing what makes you happy. And how wonderful that
actually it is something that's free. That's accessible. That you can fit into
daily life. It's physically and mentally good for you. And that you share it.
Yeah, we do it together. Yeah. And we are fortunate enough that our work
schedules allow it. What do you do? I'm a dental nurse, but I'm part time. So
obviously I've got the children. So I have Mondays and Tuesdays off, which is
lovely. And then I run a handyman company and I work for Tesco's in the
evenings, but I have Mondays off. So we always got time to do stuff and do
something that we enjoy. Yeah. Like children. Yeah. Yeah. Just love the feel of
this place. You know, the peacefulness of it. And then you get the raging of a
waterfall. So that sort of force hits you. There's so many different aspects to
this walk. And also I think I had, because of the walking I've done in the
Brecon Beacons before, has been up onto high ridges, very bare, you know, open
land. Yeah. I'm not sure I'd appreciated that there are pretty woodland walks
that you can do that are this gorgeous. There's so many to choose from here.
There's so many. And they're all quite close to one another. So there's so many
to choose from. And you've got engaged now. Yeah. And is there a plan? Do you
have to say that's wedding days then? Oh, it's all booked. Oh, isn't it? Yes. Is
it? When is it? August 2024. Oh wow. Oh, congratulations. Thank you. How many of
the group that were at your original meeting and that walking group, are you
friends with those people or was that sort of? No. No, no, but this really was
the most extraordinary coincidence. Yeah. We didn't know anyone there. She knows
nothing. I don't know anyone. Literally just complete solo walkers. Added myself
to the group because I wanted to have ideas where to go next. I posted,
everybody posted their pictures and Roger comment is on it. And yeah, just
completely by chance. So I don't know anybody else in the group. The group is a
very big group though. It's very large space. There's what 10,000 people in
there or more? No, it's more than live. And what is it called then? Walking in
Wales. Walking in Wales. Facebook group is a very good group. And they're all
very communal. Aren't they? Everyone's very nice. They'll comment on your
picture. Nice stuff. Yeah. So I felt the need to, when we did get engaged, just
do a little post to thank the group for, you know, existing and bringing this
man into my life. And it just went a bit viral after that with over 9,000 likes.
I wasn't expecting. But just to make it absolutely clear, they still weren't
getting by six of the way I do. I love all these branches, all these roots. I've
always loved this little section over there where it sort of looks like an
interwoven fingers and toes of the trees links like hands. I just see it as like
a timeline, you know, of how long it's all, you know, been here and how
expansive it is. And yeah, I just, I always love this little bit. The colour of
today as well is that burnt orange leaves that are still left, but also the
bracken over there on the far side. It's by far my most favourite colour. It's
our colour for the wedding, isn't it? Yeah. Yeah. It just reminds me of being
outside and as much as I like it when it's green and it's, you know, spring and
summer time. But yeah, autumn, winter, colour wise. Yeah. We incorporate
everything into nature, don't we? Even like the engagement ring, we've made that
nature. What have you done to the house on you? By the day. Yeah, that's me,
everyone, me. Yeah, now that was based on nature, isn't it? Yeah. Leaves and
things like that. Are you wearing it under the gloves? Yeah. Can I have a look?
Oh gosh, that's absolutely beautiful. So teardrop diamond in the middle and
green. Savarite is. Oh, how lovely. As you say, the leaves on either side. Yeah.
Of a central, so more than a teardrop, more like a seed in a way. Yeah, in a
way, yeah. Or a central of a... the centre of a... Yeah, the aim is to be like
her in the middle and then like the leaves sprouting off her really, like it was
in a nature vibe. So that was the plan. I didn't know that. That's because I'm
awesome. I didn't know that was a big day. Can't help being that awesome, love.
It's OK. How lucky are you? I know. I know. Can you keep talking about it? Yeah,
that was... I mean, I was blown away by the ring. I just... One more because you
want one is completely tailored to you. It's designed about everything that is
you. The engagement happened on a walk and was that with the full production of
Ring and down on one knee. Yeah. He proposed though and showed me the ring and
then was like, oh, let's go in the water and all I wanted to do was put the ring
on. So I was in the water going, I want to get out now. I didn't really enjoy
the tip that day. So Roger, where did you grow up? Reading. Well, Wokenham to be
exact. Just outside of Reading. I know. And what brought you to Cardiff? So my
mum is Welsh. So she moved down here and then I decided to follow. Really? And
then bought my own house and well, I love it. It is. And within an hour of
anything I want to go to really, no matter what. So I could go to a beach one
day and then go on like a long hike the next, really. This Robin has been
following us. It does every time we're here. Yeah. And every time we sort of get
to a wide, it just checks in, pops down onto a branch because I'm still with
you. We call it our pet. We do. Every time we come. Every walk. There's always a
Robin. I think he convinced us the same one. Every single walk. We've never not
had that Robin. That one will get an invitation to Reading. He'll just turn up
anyway. I can hear the waterfall. It's the one with the wind. It's the rumble.
I'm going to head down to the waterfalls now. These are the ones that you can
walk behind. And how do you say that? Scud. Scud-era. I say Ira. Ira. But my
Welsh is great. So it's spout s-g-w-d. New word y-r. New word e-i-r-a. So we've
got 170 steps down this path. Some of them are steeper than others. This way's
coming back up a bit. They're not all even. They're still going down. Yeah,
yeah. We've come all the way down those 170 steps and now staring at the
waterfall that's gushing over in three distinct channels. And there is a path
that goes behind it. And I've just seen a man walk from the other side. And I've
talked to two women. And it is a case always of just checking it's safe. Yeah, I
mean I've done it many times and I suddenly don't forget. I couldn't allow you
both to come here and not do it. Whoa, this is fabulous. The water's falling
right in front of us now. And we're into the perfect. That was magnificent
getting right in behind it. So we come out the other side and we're going to
head back through and go back up those 170 steps. Since you know the strangest
thing of all, when we came through the waterfall, who was waiting for us on a
branch the other side? Our little Robin. And I can see him over the other side
going, are you coming back now? That was so good. You have to scramble a fair
bit over the rocks to get to the path that is behind the waterfall. But exactly
as you said, so worth it. And you feel like you've been doused in magic water.
And we're not even wet. I mean, I should point out you don't go in there to get
wet. Literally just the mist from the falls. Surprising how much room is behind
the falls. Because when you look at it head on, you don't think that you can
even get behind it. And also an appreciation for the solidity of those red
sandstone rocks and the way that that water has carved through them and then,
you know, hit a point where the drop is the only thing that can be done. I think
it's quite a romantic spot as well. We've seen lots of couples going in behind
there and having a quick kiss. I was unfortunately ruining that moment for you.
So I've got a wet beard she wouldn't have done anyway. Right, we've got to climb
back up those steps now. Yeah. Oh, hello. There he is. Hello little Robin. He's
not bothered us. It's not funny. I've never had that before. Because like before
when I first, when I saw him again up here, I thought, oh, that's a different
one. Now I absolutely know it's the same one. Yeah. Every time we come here,
isn't it? Every single time. You sit on the rock when we're having our dip.
Well, it's quite hard work in the end. I put that walk in the challenging
basket, but so worth it. I feel renewed and it must keep having that effect
because you've done that lots of times and you're still glowing. Yeah. It
literally brings us to my host every time. There's never a time where, you know,
you have a bad trip here. Yeah. It's always a nice walk, isn't it? It's magical.
Just brilliant to share this walk with you and to hear about your love story and
good luck with the wedding. Thank you so much. Thank you. And bye bye to little
Robin who I think is going to leave us here. Yeah, you should come back. He'll
be there. He'll be there. Rumblingness is presented by Claire Boulding and
produced by Mackie Eyre. Now we've thought of providing a new series on
Wednesday evenings. Radio four's Lent talks for 2023. Six reflective moments
taking inspiration from the Lord's Prayer with meditations on forgiveness,
fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. A collection of personal stories from
the man who forgave his brother's killers to the writer escaping a war zone to
facing despair, but finding hope, sharing experiences on faith, humanity and how
the words of the Lord's Prayer have impacted people's lives. Lent talks begins
this Wednesday evening at 8 45 on Radio four and BBC sounds. And now on Radio
four, it's time for farming today this week with Charlotte Smith. Good morning.
Well, this week salad got political. Perhaps he believes in fairy tales. He
certainly doesn't know how the food supply system works. He jumps on a
bandwagon. We've had a lot of warm words and the clock is ticking. We are
running out of time. We're seeing contraction like never before in tomatoes,
peppers, cucumbers. It's been obvious for a long time that the Conservative
Party has given up on farmers. If we had the investment for new infrastructure,
new greenhouses, that would make us more profitable to be able to reinvest going
forward with bare shelves in supermarkets where tomatoes should be. And some
retailers rationing them along with cucumbers and peppers. What's going on?
Who's fault is it? And is the solution turnips, indoor farms or better contracts
for farmers? Well, in this programme, we'll try to find out with a panel of
experts and opinions from around the country and beyond. Joining me are Kevin
White, fresh foods editor of the grocer, Lee Styles from Lee Valley Growers, Dr
Cameron Maruff, associate professor of supply chain analytics at Bradford
University and Jonathan Tremaine from Global Pacific, which sources fruit and
veg for supermarkets. So what is going on? Kevin White, let's start with you.
Which supermarkets are limiting what and why? On Friday, we were seeing buying
restrictions on certain pieces of fruit and veg in Aldi, Tesco, Morrisons and
Azta. They're citing major weather problems in Spain and Northern Africa in
Morocco. And it's been really volatile weather over the past year in these
regions. And obviously, we supply most of our produce from these regions at this
time of year. Cameron, you've got wide experience working in logistics for
retailers before you came in academic and started analysing it all. What's gone
wrong? I just think it's probably a little unfair to just blame bad weather.
Yes, it's triggered what's happening at the moment. But I feel like we are doing
in most instances where we're sort of papering over the cracks here. I think we
need to understand what our internal infrastructure does look like. We have
limited support for farmers. And whether we dance around the topic of Brexit or
not, unfortunately, there is so much uncertainty for farmers post Brexit in
terms of the support that they do have. The energy support that they've been
exempted from recently, again, doesn't really make much sense given that they
are a sector that's heavily reliant on energy given they operate on such low
margins. So if we were able to iron out some of these internal issues and
challenges, we would be able to source at least and make up for some of the
shortfall internally. We're going to explore many of those issues, including
Brexit in just a moment. Lee Styles from Lee Valley Growers, are you tempted to
say at this point, we told you so? I think we heard from you last year on this
programme. You were warning of problems because growers just weren't planting.
It's simply down to price and the supermarkets' choice on where they source
their produce from. We would normally plant in December and we would be picking
now. But the supermarkets didn't want to pay the additional costs that we would
have incurred for doing that. So they chose to go overseas and source more and
more produce from Spain, Morocco, Turkey and Egypt. A lot of the produce grown
in Spain and Morocco is under plastic and without heat. So once they get a bit
of cold weather, it slows down and it's just not ready. Jonathan, I'm guessing
you have been very busy this week trying to source product. Where have you been
looking for it or have you just said to retailers, sorry, can't help? Well, I
think it's too easy to conflate to a series of issues. So I've been dealing with
Spain for 30 something years. And if I had a plan for every time someone said to
me, it's never done this before, I wouldn't be doing this conversation. So I
think you have got a weather related issue and that's impacted clearly on the
availability coming into the UK. And you've got a UK market that's inflexible
and not very agile. And you've got a European market that's highly flexible. So
you haven't got the same issues in Europe because they flex their prices
according to supply and demand. Supermarkets don't flex their pricing because
the customer says we don't want to have variable pricing. In Europe, the market
is much more dynamic. Basically, they'll be paying £1.60 for their head of
lettuce or whatever it is. And they will flex and using the economics of supply
and demand much more in tune with you and I would expect if something short,
you'd pay more for it. And the UK is just a very inflexible market. You've got
cold weather going on in Spain, and that's restricted. And every in my career,
every year something like that's happened. So when I ran as an Wal-Mart, they're
exhausting business, we would have moments where we would restrict purchases
because people would come in and buy a trolley load of cucumbers, either to go
and sell in their green grocer store or to sell on to locating customers. So
this is not new, but it's worse. And then we can talk about climate change. And
so the impact is greater, but it's coincided with a whole conversation around
food security or insecurity around investment about the cost of living and the
cost of fuel. Clearly, a lack of strategy from the government around what are
the priorities. Let's try and break those down as we go through the programme
then. Let's get the B word out of the way first. Is this about Brexit? The
former Sainsbury's CEO, Justin King thinks it is. Here he is on the Today
programme earlier in the week. This is a sector that's been significantly
disrupted by Brexit. And if you look in particular at the salad veg, which
historically for a long time actually has been grown 52 weeks of the year in the
UK under glass, I encourage your listeners to go on a map app and Google FANIT
Earth. They'll see the biggest greenhouse complex in Europe in FANIT, which used
to supply vast quantities of tomatoes, cucumbers and the like. But that's not a
sector the government's chosen to support this winter from an energy point of
view. So we're uniquely exposed to imports at this time of year. There is a
genuine shortage, but we did rather bring this problem upon ourselves. Cameron,
you brought the word up. Is it Brexit? I would say yes, Brexit is really putting
pressure on. And I think further to the point I think Jonathan was making is
Brexit has really hiked up the prices. And in supply chains, it's simple. If
there are price hikes, it's passed on either to the customer, to the consumer,
or it's absorbed by the retailers. And given that the fact that the retailers
are buying bulk of this, they are not willing to pass that cost on to the
consumers, which often means it's our farmers. And it often is those who are
producing that are at the unfortunate end of this and they have to face the
brunts. Lee, how much difference has Brexit made to what you're doing, your
members are doing? It contributes in a negative way, especially on labour,
because we can only source labour on a six-month period through the seasonal
workers scheme, which means that if we're trying to do an 11-month season, we
will have to recruit four times throughout the year in order to make sure that
we don't have a gap in skills whilst we're planting and picking. So obviously
we're at a disadvantage to European growers in that respect. Also, it used to
take two days to get a piece of machinery. It can take two weeks now to get it
from Holland. A lot of drivers don't want to come here anymore. It's too hard.
They're sitting queues. There's no welfare facilities. They go back with an
empty load. We're not attractive. We're not a big market for European growers
anymore. So I think it's kind of coming to a head where the most concerning
thing is the government seems to be more interested in getting retailers
together and talking about alternative sources for produce in the future rather
than trying to support British growers to grow more. Jonathan, as I'm sure we'll
hear in a minute, it's not a picnic in European countries either at the moment
for veg. Has Brexit had an impact here? Well, I think Brexit has got a lot to
answer for. I don't think it's got anything to do with the current crisis of
selling veg on the supermarket shelves because it's a moment in time. It's a
weather-related event. It's not unique. It's happened before. I think everything
Lee's just said is absolutely relevant about the future and that there are parts
of the UK industry that will struggle and will disappear because of factors that
have been affected by labour availability as a really good example. And then
what's the energy strategy? Let's get the view from Europe. Joining us is Sanya
Simovich. She's senior policy adviser at Copacogica, which represents farmers
across the EU. What's the situation for growers and indeed for consumers across
the EU? We are not facing this situation in Europe. There have been no reports
from our members from across Europe that there have been shortages to the
supermarkets and to consumers. The weather conditions this year have indeed been
very difficult and they have impacted Spain a lot, which is one of the main
producers also for European vegetable demand. I believe around 81% of fruit and
veg produced in Spain finishes in the European market. So of course I believe
that if there is a squeeze in production and this year there is both in the
south due to these weather conditions but also in the north due to the decrease
in production in the greenhouses because of the high energy prices, which have
been a big problem. All of this together I think leads to the fact that whatever
is produced in Europe is also more likely to stay in Europe for also practical
reasons. But what also one of the speakers mentioned, we do have more of this
flexibility. So what we did see is an increase of price to consumers of the
final products in supermarkets. It has still been a lot of management and a lot
of resilience building and I have to say also from the COVID experience, etc.
within the supply chains in Europe. So we are not experiencing any lack of
produce on the shelves. So who's been doing that resilience building? Is that
something that growers and their associations are doing within countries or is
the EU organizing it? How is it happening? It comes from both sides. I mean our
sector is very represented at the Brussels level but of course our members at
the national level as well communicate a lot with the respective governments.
Actions have been put in place and I also have some good news. I have talked
with the Benelux producers of fruit and veg specifically in the greenhouses and
they say that they will pick up the production from March. So because there have
been some actions in terms of allowing for the decrease of the costs in energy,
etc. so they will pick up their production. So I'm really hoping that also for
the UK it's going to be a short-lived problem. Lee Styles, are your producers
going to pick up production like the Benelux ones or is that not something on
their mind? We've planted the majority of our tomatoes, peppers, and aubergines
in the last couple of weeks and we're planting our cucumbers now. So tomatoes,
peppers and aubergines are not going to be ready until late April, early May.
Cucumbers will start picking in about six weeks time. Having said that, half of
our growers still haven't decided whether or not to plant because the prices
have been offered are rigid and they will be taking a massive financial risk if
the weather is not as good as last year. This is probably a good point to say
that we did invite the British Retail Consortium which represents all the major
supermarkets. They couldn't make the programme today. They have said that
difficult weather in southern Europe and northern Africa has disrupted harvests
but say while disruption is expected to last a few weeks, supermarkets are adept
at managing supply chain issues and are working with farmers to ensure that
customers are able to access a wide range of fresh produce. You're listening to
Farming Today this week here on BBC Radio 4 with me Charlotte Smith. We are, of
course, discussing salad. Let's talk about solutions. And the first one, let
them eat turnips. That was one of the headlines in yesterday's papers. Therese
Coffey seemed to suggest that one of the solutions here is the seasonal eating
of neeps. Here's what she said. It's important to make sure that we cherish the
specialisms that we have in this country. A lot of people would be eating
turnips right now rather than thinking necessarily about aspects of lettuce and
tomatoes and similar. But I'm conscious that consumers want a year-round choice
and that is what our supermarkets and food producers and growers around the
world try to satisfy. The Secretary of State for the Environment to raise coffee
speaking in Parliament earlier this week. We did have some emails this week
suggesting that she might have a point and that expecting tomatoes in February
in the UK isn't right. Is seasonal eating something that is a trend, Kevin? I
really do despair when I hear that from Theresa Coffey. Of course, you can eat
seasonably and many of us do, but it's also 2023, not 1945. So obviously times
have changed. So what the government needs to do instead of platitudes about how
we should be embracing seasonal wages and actually dealing with the issues at
play, I wish there are many in this industry. Cameron? We look at the egg
shortages that have recently happened. Again, farms have been left out of the
conversation and then this current situation that we're having. So if you really
take a step back and reflect, instead of having these recommendations of
switching to turnips from tomatoes and other absurd comments, what are you
actually doing in the interim? What are we doing now? And the reality is if we
don't support these elements of our economy that we rely so much on,
unfortunately, we might be sat here in six months time in another 12 months
time, having another discussion about some disruption along some of the elements
of the supply chain. So we really have to take a step back and understand the
root cause issues and how we're actually just dancing around the challenges and
trying to suggest stuff that's only short term, short lived and again, not
realistic either. Well, we did ask to speak to a minister. No one was available,
but we did get a statement from Defra. It says, we understand public concerns
around the supply of fresh vegetables. However, the UK has a highly resilient
food supply chain and is well equipped to deal with disruption, which is the
result of poor weather in Spain and North Africa. Ministers will hold a
roundtable with industry next week to discuss how they can return supplies to
normal. They go on. We are helping businesses with their costs through the
energy bill relief scheme, business rates relief and a two point four billion
fuel duty cut. And small businesses will be fully protected from next year's
rise in corporation tax. On top of this, we've also increased the number of
seasonal worker visas to forty five thousand to support the horticulture
industry. Jonathan, what else could, should government be doing at this point?
In my view, two issues, one, fuel and how they want to support that. And
secondly, labour availability. I think those are two big issues. We could have a
long debate about what is seasonal. So I could argue that tomatoes growing
without heat, not in glass in southern Europe and North Africa are more seasonal
than growing them in a glass house in the UK. I could argue that. And then I
could argue, well, what's seasonal about a banana? What's seasonal about citrus?
So we have this huge global supply chain for fresh food. We need to make that
work in the context of domestic production. But we shouldn't conflate that with
we should only eat seasonally. You know, let's eat turnips. Well, well done to
raise coffee. And I'm sure she said it tongue in cheek. She clearly doesn't know
what she's talking about. Government though, needs to support the industry in
the decision it makes rather than make the decisions for the industry. So if I
got a glass house, I want to grow fruit or tomatoes, cucumbers. Well, what are
the economics of that? And how can they support that? Certainly in the short
term, while the crisis that we're involved in this global crisis around
triggered by Ukraine and putting weather to one side is resolved, but casting it
adrift, then that is dangerous because that will change the infrastructure and
will make us more reliable on what I might consider to be seasonal UK products.
That's the issue. But we mustn't think that we've got seasonality year round on
all these products in the UK because that isn't the case. It was the National
Farmers Union conference in Birmingham this week. Anna Hill was there and she
spoke to the farming minister, Mark Spencer, about the problems that we're
talking about today. Traditionally, we have used imports, particularly in salad
products and brassicas to fill those gaps on shelves in January and February.
There has been some huge weather challenges within Europe that has brought that
to the fore. Now, what we need to do is make sure that we've got domestic
markets, which are able to fill where they can fill those gaps. But we also need
to recognise seasonality, which we've sort of lost our way a little bit, you
know, as consumers. But our growers are not growing. The production has
diminished significantly because they're not getting paid what they need to
cover those extra costs. And that is a massive challenge, which I wholly accept
is very difficult. What we have seen, of course, is movement in the marketplace
as well, to an extent where some of those products are now commanding quite a
premium. The difficulty is, for those people that are contracted to some of our
supermarkets, they're unable to extract themselves from those contracts. And we,
of course, in the department, will be having conversations with retailers to try
and help and mitigate some of the impact of that and try and help and support
producers. The energy relief scheme was mentioned as well. Minette Batters
mentioned that Kew Gardens has allowed some help with its heating, but
Glasshouse Growers aren't. Bays are looking at that and the Treasury are looking
at those schemes and they're being reviewed at this moment in time. We, of
course, are making representations into that sector. But we do need to recognise
that it is taxpayers' money that is being used to support. And if we're not
careful, we'll just end up in a position where we're just taxing people to take
money off them to give it back in another format. We've got to try and make the
marketplace work here. What do you think of that, Lee Styles? The bottom line is
that if you want British produce, then you're going to have to support British
growers. And that means help them transition from fossil fuels to renewable
energy at the cost of around half a million pounds per grower. So, you know,
we're talking about big investments. Is there an argument here that says,
actually, for instance, in the Lee Valley, you grow in relatively old-fashioned
glasshouses. They're not state of the art. And actually, we can innovate our way
out of this. We look at vertical farming. We look at different ways of doing it,
which might be painful for growers like yours. But it's not worth giving you
half a million pounds. It's better to put that money into a vertical farm. Yeah.
Well, if you can find me a vertical farm that's ever made a profit, then I'd
probably agree with you. I mean, you can't grow a 15 metre long tomato plant in
a tray stacked up against the roof. It's good for some crops. It can displace
some leafy salads and shoots, et cetera. But we're not even in competition with
them. If you want to feed people on a commercial basis, it's not the answer.
Cameron? So I think on that, I think there is definitely a need for us to try to
explore other innovative solutions. And often we conflate vertical farming
versus traditional farming. And as Lee has said, I often don't think they are in
competition. The whole premise and purpose I think of having vertical farms is
purpose built indoor controlled environment. It's a modern greenhouse for
specific crops, right? So your salad leaves, your strawberries, your tomatoes,
maybe you wouldn't be having a seed or crop in there, for instance. So I think
it's about understanding that it's complementary, though it's not there to
replace. I think it's understanding where that can play a role. And for
instance, if we had vertical farms, again, infrastructure in place, maybe the
shortfall that we are having at this moment in time could have been covered.
Kevin, do innovations like vertical farms, things like that, do they actually
sort of make a mark on the market at the moment or are they just too niche? It's
still obviously early. We're writing a lot about new vertical farms being built
at the moment. And in fact, Iceland has just launched its first bagged salad
this week from GrowUp Farms, a British business. It's really interesting, but
it's not the panacea at the moment. Jonathan, you mentioned eggs earlier, and it
was something that came up at the NFU conference. The President, Minette
Batters, asking the Secretary of State if she'd use her powers in the
Agriculture Act to intervene, to deal with what she described as market failure
in pigs as well as poultry. Do you think we're at that point, Jonathan, now with
some of the sectors here? I think we probably are. Part of my thinking is, well,
the less government have to do with any of this, the better, based on their
knowledge and understanding and rhetoric, which is just so off-piste, it's
unbelievable. However, when you look at the egg position and the whole industry
knew a year ago there was going to be an issue with eggs. Born from another
pandemic and bird flu, and then with the cost of inputs going up, everybody
knew. And you'd think, well, actually, you would rather hope that that's going
to be resolved internally between supply and retailer, because that's the best
way to resolve this without any government intervention. But you've got to be
careful with that. You've got to look at the scenario as it's playing out today
and say, well, how on earth can we be in the place where we are today? And so
you have to look at the retailers and say, well, do they stand up to some sort
of interrogation and ultimately criticism about how they've handled it? Because
there won't be enough egg. There is an egg shortage. They've been rationed for
weeks and weeks. And so how's that going to resolve itself? Well, I think it
will resolve itself, and I don't think it will resolve itself with anything to
do with the government. I think the top line strategy has to be, well, health.
Let's talk about health and how food relates to the health of the nation. And of
course, everything that's happening is you've got inflation in fresh food, and
you've got a crisis in terms of incomes, disposable income, and what people have
got available. And they're making decisions based on what they can afford, and
it's not fresh produce. And that is a bigger problem. Just before we end, I am
going to put you all in charge. And you can all come up with one thing that if
you were the Secretary of State for the Environment, you would do. Kevin White,
fresh foods editor at The Grazer, what one thing would you suggest should
happen? It has to be labour, deal with the labour situation. It's a chronic
issue that's been going on since before Brexit, and it's worse than worse. And
every year they fail to engage in it, but on the issue on time. Lee Styles from
Lee Valley Growers, what would you do? It has to be energy. If the government
wants us to move over to renewable energy, then help us finance it. If they
don't, if they're not worried about environmental impact, then subsidise the gas
price. Dr Cameron Maroof from Bradford University. I would say immediate action
has to be taken to protect the horticulture sector within the UK. Energy relief
has to be a priority in order to navigate through this initial mess that we find
ourselves in. And a more longer-term strategy would be investment within this
sector. And Jonathan Tremaine from Global Pacific. I'm not an interventionist,
so I'd say sort labour out, and I think the market will resolve itself. And if
I'm really honest, and hopefully devoid of government involvement. I suspect we
will be talking a lot more about this over the next few weeks. Thank you very
much to all our panellists. Do feel very free to get in touch with your view.
You can email us. We're farming.today at bbc.co.uk, or you could tweet us. We're
at bbc.farming.today, if you can keep your comments to that many characters.
That's it from us. I'm Charlotte Smith, the show's studio manager is Susie
Robbins, and the producer in Bristol is Beatrice Fenton. Thank you, Charlotte.
Now let's go to the forecast with the details. Here's Louise Lear. Morning,
Louise. Good morning. Quite a quiet weekend of weather awaits. In fact, we
should see some sunshine. But the best of the sunshine will be out to the west.
And the reason being, high pressure very much controlling the weather story at
the moment. But as the winds turn round in a clockwise direction, that means a
northeasterly wind is feeding in quantitatively. And we see a wind is feeding in
quite a lot of cloud off the North Sea, risk of a few showers, and the winds
gusting in excess of 40 miles an hour at times. So that's going to make it feel
bitterly cold on an exposed coast. And some of those showers across the peaks
and the Pennines could have a wintry mix in there as well. So in the best of the
sunshine with a little more shelter, we'll see top temperatures across western
Scotland, parts of Northern Ireland, England and Wales between let's say 6 to 8
degrees. On exposed east coast it's going to feel much cooler than that. But
these kind of temperatures, they should be where they are where they should be
for this time of year. Clear skies through the evening is going to lead to a
chilly frosty night, little more sunshine and lighter winds as we go into
Sunday. Louise, thanks very much indeed. On BBC iPlayer. Six robbers have
carried out an armed raid, stealing almost three tonnes of gold. Inspired by
Britain's biggest gold heist. How do you shift three tonnes of gold? Slowly. 26
million pounds worth of pure gold in the possession of people who didn't expect
to have it. If you could handle a job like this, then I'd have heard of you. You
only hear about the people who get caught. Stealing it was just the start. We're
looking for six robbers and three tonnes of gold. Every ring, every watch. If
you're looking for the gold, it's all around you. The gold watch on BBC iPlayer.
This is BBC Radio 4. We'll join Michels Houssein and Martha Carney on the today
programme in just a minute. Later this morning, Giorgio Moyes joins Nicky Beatty
and Richard Cawles, the best-selling author, has sold over 50 million novels and
Me Before You was adapted into a film starring Sam Claflin and Emilia Clarke.
Giorgio talks about the inspiration of the BBC live streams and the way they are
distributed via third-party services and platforms. And the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds. Those and much more on Saturday Live, just after 9
o'clock. On FM on digital radio online.