TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 6 o'clock. This is Vigialis. Good evening. A senior police officer
in Northern Ireland is fighting for his life after he was shot in front of his
son. He'd been coaching a youth football session. Clearly we are utterly shocked
and angered by last night's brazen and calculated attack. Police suspect
dissident Republicans. Three men have been arrested. The backlog of people
waiting to hear about their asylum claims has reached a record high. Sir Keir
Starmer has set out what he called five missions for Labour if it wins the next
election. Football fans have welcomed a shake-up of the game in England, but the
Premier League has warned against deterring investment. And... There it is! The
crazy gang have beaten the game. The legendary BBC commentator John Motsen has
died at the age of 77. Three men are being questioned in connection with the
attempted murder of a senior police officer in County Tyrone. Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell was off duty and had just finished coaching a children's
football training session when he was shot at a sports centre in Oma last night.
He remains critically ill in hospital. In a joint statement, Northern Ireland's
main political parties condemned what they called a reprehensible and callous
attack. Police are keeping an open mind about the motive but say the dissident
Republican group, the new IRA, is the primary focus of their inquiry. Our first
report tonight comes from Oma and our Ireland correspondent Chris Page. This
huge crime scene takes in football pitches, a running track and a pavilion.
Police officers wearing white forensic suits have been searching for evidence
all day after a Wednesday night sports session ended in horror. John Caldwell is
a father who was coaching young people but he was shot because he's a detective.
Assistant Chief Constable Mark McCoon has recounted how his colleague was
attacked. John was finishing up. He was accompanied by his young son, putting
footballs into the boot of his car. When two gunmen appeared, fired multiple
shots, John ran a short distance and as he fell to the ground, the gunmen
continued to fire shots at him. At this time, there were many other young
people, children, awaiting pick-up by their parents. Those children ran for
cover in sheer terror. Peter Gormley belongs to a local running club and was at
the sports complex when he heard the gunfire. Somebody said, that's fireworks.
But I thought, no, that sounds like shots, about eight or nine. Then somebody
said something about a gun, you know, so everyone sort of panicked. I went down
with another guy and got the young people's coaches to get them into e-groups,
you know, and we're as safe as they could be, you know. But yeah, a lot of
people running up the grass and banked on it, you know, to try and get away but
they had nowhere to go. The last time a police officer was murdered in Northern
Ireland, it happened in this town. Constable Ronan Kerr was killed by a bomb
under his car 12 years ago. But people in Omagh are determined that violence
shouldn't define this place. They've spoken out strongly against the gunmen.
It's upsmacked, it's affected a lot of people local here in the town, affected
businesses, people's feelings and raised tensions. The fact that it's happened
at all, it's our cake. We don't need this kind of carry-on around our town now
anymore. Words can't explain it, like, it's awful, just awful. What sort of
people do things like that? You know, it doesn't make sense. You can't come to
terms with that at all. The shooting has happened during another time of
political instability. The power-sharing devolved government at Stormont hasn't
been fully operating for more than a year because of a crisis relating to Brexit
trading arrangements. The five biggest Stormont parties have issued a joint
statement condemning the attack in Omagh. Liam Kelly from the Police Federation
says London should step in to give officers here more funding to deal with
paramilitary groups. The policing budget has unfortunately been slashed over the
last number of years. That's not going to help the police in dealing with this.
So I mean, I would call today that those in power, particularly in Westminster
at the moment, because we've no devolved government in operation in Northern
Ireland, is that they actually give the Chief Constable both the funding and the
resource that he needs to keep our community and to keep our police officers
safe. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is being treated in hospital in
Londonderry, where his condition is said to be critical but stable. The men
who've been arrested are 38, 45 and 47. They were detained in County Tyrone and
are being questioned at a police station in Belfast. The Police Service of
Northern Ireland said that despite the rare nature of these attacks in modern
times, all of its officers were working against a backdrop of substantial
threats. Our Home Affairs correspondent in Belfast, Julian O'Neill, considers
whether the risks posed by paramilitary organisations are growing again. Several
small, dissident Republican groups emerged out of the Provisional IRA and,
unlike their predecessor, are violent opponents of the political settlement
which ended the troubles 25 years ago. The biggest and most active group is the
new IRA, whose main areas of operations are Londonderry and Tyrone. Previous
security assessments estimated it had about 100 members prepared to commit acts
of terrorism. Its support base was said to number around 500. Attacks have
occurred only sporadically. After it murdered the journalist Lira McKee during
rioting in 2019, the new IRA was put on the back foot by several successful
security operations run by MI5, leading to the first reduction in the terrorist
threat level in Northern Ireland in a decade. What followed has been a
reorganisation of the group's leadership and after a lull in activity, it re-
emerged last November with a bomb attack on a police patrol car. The shooting in
Oma is the most serious incident in many years and demonstrates that while a
small organisation with little support, it retains the capacity to strike
against police officers. The number of asylum seekers waiting for the Home
Office to make a decision about their claim has reached a record high of more
than 160,000. The majority of them have been waiting for more than six months.
The latest figures have thrown into doubt the Prime Minister's pledge to reduce
the asylum backlog by the end of the year. Our Home Editor Mark Easton reports.
Rishi Sunak has vowed to stop the migrant boats crossing the Channel by swiftly
returning asylum seekers arriving by irregular routes, but his hopes of speeding
up the asylum system by eradicating the backlog of cases have been dealt a blow
by new figures showing the numbers awaiting even an initial decision from the
Home Office has risen by 60% in a year, topping 160,000 for the first time.
Ideas to clear the backlog include granting asylum to migrants from five
countries with high acceptance rates without the need to attend a face-to-face
interview. Instead, they must complete a ten-page form in English. The chairman
of the Conservative Party, Greg Hands, has denied fast-track processing
threatens public safety. We need to get to grips with the backlog. That is what
the streamlined procedure today is all about. Absolutely, we're committed to the
safety and security of this country. Some refugee agencies have expressed
concern that with the Home Office refusing to pay for translation services or
legal support, asylum seekers will struggle to complete the questionnaire.
Individuals claiming asylum in the UK last year numbered 89,000, the highest for
two decades, but just 24,000 claims were resolved in the same period. While the
number of asylum caseworkers has doubled since the pandemic, each worker is less
productive. In early 2020, seven decisions were made by each worker each month.
Now it's four decisions a month. Unless productivity can be dramatically
improved, the chances of the Prime Minister keeping his promise to eradicate the
backlog this year look slim. Government plans to establish an independent
regulator of men's football in England have been given a cautious welcome. The
move was recommended in a fan review last year to make clubs more financially
resilient and to give supporters more say on how they are run. The Premier
League said it was vital that regulation did not damage the game. Here's our
sports editor Dan Rowan. The Premier League may enjoy global popularity, but
English football has had to tackle mounting problems in recent years, from
historic clubs like Bury going bust to the threat of a breakaway European Super
League. And today the culture secretary, Lucy Fraser, confirmed a major overhaul
of the way that the game is run. We are bringing forward today the biggest
shake-up in football since the rules were first formulated. An independent
regulator who's going to oversee and ensure financial stability. The key
recommendation of a fan-led review, the new regulator will issue clubs with
annual licences that depend on a sound business plan, bring in a tougher owners
and directors test and empower fans. With most of its clubs technically
insolvent, the Football League also wants a greater share of the wealth from the
top of the sport and the regulator will have the power to step in to resolve
what's becoming a long-running disagreement over financial redistribution. But
the Premier League chief executive Richard Masters told me the regulator must
not deter investment. We as football authorities need to rebuild trust. I don't
think English football has anything to be embarrassed about. This needs to be a
very precise regulatory tool, not a sledgehammer, otherwise it might take
football sideways or even backwards rather than forwards. While some are wary of
this reform, others wanted it to come sooner and go further. What is certain is
that English football has taken a step in a new direction. The Labour leader,
Sir Keir Starmer, has promised that if his party wins power at the next
election, the UK will have the highest growth in the G7 by the end of its first
term. In a speech in Manchester, he said the pledge was one of five missions
that his government would prioritise. Our chief political correspondent Nick
Eardley is in the city and watched Sir Keir's speech. There is an increasing
confidence in the Labour Party that they can form the next government. It can be
seen in today's announcement. Five missions for Labour to pursue in power, some
lasting into a second term, part of what Sir Keir Starmer called a decade of
renewal. There is a lack of detail about how these headlines would all be
achieved. We're told there will be more over the next few months. But Sir Keir
is promising the following. To make the NHS secure for the future. To make
streets safer. Improve childcare and opportunity. Make the UK a green energy
superpower. And on growth, a tangible target. To secure the highest sustained
growth in the G7 by the end of Labour's first term. What we need has become
crystal clear. Growth. Economic growth is the oxygen for our ambitions. So let
me announce the economic mission of the next Labour government. By the end of
Labour's first term, we will deliver the highest sustained growth in the G7.
Pledges like these are of course easier said than done. Both Labour and the
Conservatives are now offering economic growth as a central tenet and to make
the health service fit for the future. Sir Keir argued that there had been a
lack of long-term vision under the Conservatives though and that the
government's approach needed to move beyond sticking plasters. In response, the
Conservatives said that Labour was offering nothing new and Sir Keir couldn't be
trusted not to change his mind. Sir Keir's internal critics and momentum hit out
at the Labour leader for dropping other pledges on public ownership he'd made
during his leadership campaign. Opinion polls suggest that Labour has a 20% lead
over the Conservatives but should the party win power, how would Sir Keir keep
his pledge on growth? Our economics editor Faisal Islam has this analysis. As a
target, having the highest sustained growth in the G7 has its challenges. Most
obviously, a British Prime Minister does not have the power to control what's
going on in the US, Canada, Japan, France, Germany and Italy. But it's not a
formal target and nor could it be. It is what Sir Keir describes as a mission.
It is something of a hostage to fortune over the medium term, but so was the
equivalent commitment from the PM simply to grow the economy at some point. What
was more intriguing, however, was what the leader of the opposition said after
his speech. Sir Keir said that investors were telling him they were not that
interested in investing in the UK because they didn't see the long-term plan and
so the conditions for growth. He later elaborated that this was connected to
political instability within the Conservative Party, having led to three Prime
Ministers and four Chancellors in a year. So Keir Starmer appears to be telling
global investors that political stability will be a bedrock for investment and
growth. But to achieve his ambitious mission, concrete policies are required.
The UN's Middle East envoy has been meeting leaders from the Palestinian
militant group Hamas in Gaza as part of efforts to calm escalating tensions. A
general strike has been called by Palestinian officials after yesterday's
Israeli raid in the occupied West Bank left 11 people dead and more than 80
injured. From Nablus in the West Bank, our Middle East correspondent Tom Bateman
sent this report. At yet another wake in the city of Nablus, the lines of
mourning are getting longer. Men queue to embrace Elias Ashkar, whose 61-year-
old father was among the civilians killed by Israeli forces during yesterday's
raid. Elias is an emergency ward nurse. He found his father among the dead. I
was working the morning shift when the casualties were being brought in. I
opened the curtain to see my father's body. I couldn't believe it. I was in a
state of shock. I was waiting for someone to tell me it was a dream, says Elias.
The Israeli army hasn't commented directly on the case, but acknowledged what it
called problematic scenes filmed yesterday, apparently showing unarmed people
being shot. It said its own troops had come under fire from militants, but it
was reviewing everything that took place. 11 Palestinians, including six
militants, were killed in the raid, which Israel said targeted those involved in
killing a soldier last year, who it said were planning further attacks. The raid
was the deadliest in the occupied West Bank in two decades. It triggered
Palestinian rocket fire into Israel from Gaza overnight, with Israeli airstrikes
in response. No casualties were reported on either side. The UN's Middle East
envoy, Tor Wennesland, went to Gaza to call for calm, but the air is
increasingly volatile, weeks before Muslim and Jewish religious holidays
coincide, and many fear the worst. You're listening to the 6 o'clock news on BBC
Radio 4. The main news so far, three people have been arrested in connection
with the shooting of an off-duty police officer in County Tiron. The backlog of
people waiting for asylum decisions has reached a record level. Still to come...
He sat in my kitchen and said, would you like to hear my latest song? And so me
and the kids said, yes, please. And he sang Space Oddity. The David Bowie
archive that's been given to the nation. China's deputy ambassador to the United
Nations says sending weapons to Ukraine will only add fuel to the fire and
exacerbate tensions. Dai Bing was speaking to the General Assembly ahead of a
vote tonight on a resolution calling for Russia to unconditionally and
immediately withdraw from Ukraine. Our correspondent, Nada Taufiq, reports from
New York. China, one of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council,
has chosen to abstain on most General Assembly resolutions condemning Russia,
suggesting there is a limit to the so-called no-limits partnership signed by the
two countries. China's representative to the UN, Dai Bing, told the hall that
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries should be respected.
He stressed, though, that the international community should focus its efforts
on facilitating a ceasefire and getting Ukraine and Russia to resume
negotiations. When it's into the Ukraine crisis, brutal facts offer an ample
proof that sending weapons will not bring peace. The United States and NATO
believe Beijing is considering supplying arms to Russia, something it has
dismissed as speculation. China's UN representative reiterated that soon his
country would release a policy paper setting out its position on how to settle
the conflict through political means. A safety review is being carried out of a
decongestant which is widely used in over-the-counter medicines because of
concerns about rare but potentially serious side effects. Officials are worried
that products containing pseudoephedrine could affect blood vessels to the
brain, but drug regulators insist the risks are extremely low. Our health
correspondent Michelle Roberts has more. People take pseudoephedrine to relieve
congestion. It comes in sprays, liquids and tablets and is sometimes mixed with
other medicines for coughs and colds or allergies. It can help clear blocked
airways by reducing blood flow in swollen nasal passages. But it can affect
vessels in the brain too and this can lead to some rare side effects with
products already including warnings inside packs about these. One is a brain
blood vessel condition called posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome which
can cause blurred vision and seizures. Another is reversible cerebral
vasoconstriction syndrome which can cause sudden severe thunderclap headaches
that are sometimes a sign of a dangerous brain bleed. Laura Wilson from the
Royal Pharmaceutical Society said people shouldn't be alarmed. Medicines in
general are very carefully assessed before they're made available to the public
but it's only right that if rare side effects do emerge that they are assessed
by the authorities and then decisions made about their availability. But we
would encourage patients if you have any concerns or questions to please speak
to a health professional such as a pharmacist for advice. In the UK people can
report any suspected side effects to the Medicines and Healthcare Products
Regulatory Agency. It says public safety is a top priority and that it keeps the
safety of all medicines under close review to ensure the benefits outweigh any
risks. There's increasing international concern about violence in Nigeria. Head
of elections this weekend after a candidate for the country's Senate was shot
dead. The presidential race is expected to be one of the most closely fought in
recent years with the two main runners facing stiff competition from a movement
popular with students. Our West Africa correspondent Mayoni Jones has been
looking at the issues weighing on the minds of voters. Anger is growing across
Nigeria, Africa's biggest economy. There's a cash shortage, the result of a last
minute decision by the central bank to redesign the local currency. That's made
it difficult for many to buy basics like food and medicine at a time when the
country's economy is already struggling. Since President Buhari came into power
eight years ago, Nigeria has been through two recessions, unemployment has
quadrupled and inflation is at 21 per cent. Voters will be hoping whoever they
elect on Saturday will turn the economy around. And for the first time, they'll
have another choice besides the ruling All Progressives Congress and the main
opposition People's Democratic Party. The third party candidate Peter Obi of the
lesser known Labour Party has galvanised young people despite being in his 60s.
With 26 per cent of the electorate made up of students, their vote could prove
decisive in this election. But it may be an uphill battle for Mr Obi who doesn't
have the nationwide support of his competitors. Still, his presence on the
ballot is making this one of the most unpredictable Nigerian elections in years.
The BBC Director General Tim Davie has told staff in India that nothing is more
important than reporting news impartially without fear or favour after tax
officials searched the corporation's offices in Delhi and Mumbai. The BBC had
recently aired a documentary which was critical of the Indian Prime Minister
Narendra Modi. Staff at two EU institutions have been told to remove the
Chinese-owned social media app TikTok from all their official devices because of
security concerns. At a news conference, the European Commission said it had
reason to take action but didn't give any details. Our Brussels correspondent
Jessica Parker has been scrolling the app. This TikTok video where a young boy
explains how much he loves corn on the cob recently went viral on the social
media platform where users post or watch short clips. But the EU's executive
arm, which employs around 32,000 people, has ordered that the popular app be
deleted from phones or devices that have work email or systems installed on
them. Staff have until the middle of March to comply and the measure will be
kept under review. The European Council it's emerged will take similar steps.
TikTok's parent company ByteDance has faced increasing Western scrutiny over
fears about how much access Beijing may have to user data. It's denied that the
Chinese government has control or access to data and a spokesperson for TikTok
said the commission's decision was misguided. The US has already banned the app
from federal government devices last year. Scotland's chief constable has
announced he will retire in the summer after nearly six years in the job. Sir
Ian Livingstone said Police Scotland had delivered value for money and praised
its work during the COP26 climate summit in Glasgow and the events that followed
the death of Queen Elizabeth at Balmoral. He'd recently raised concerns about
financial pressures facing the service. The Environment Secretary, Therese
Coffey, has said shortages of fresh vegetables could last for up to a month.
Responding to an urgent question in the House of Commons, she said ministers
would lead talks with retailers about finding alternative sources of fresh
produce. Four supermarkets have imposed limits on the number of some items
customers can buy. Here's our business correspondent Theo Leggett. Hot weather,
cold weather and the high cost of energy have all been given as reasons for the
lack of some fresh fruit and vegetables in the supermarkets. However, it's also
clear that UK retailers have been suffering more than their European
counterparts. In the Commons, Therese Coffey rejected the suggestion that this
might be linked to Brexit and instead blamed the type of fixed-price contracts
used by British store chains. She was then asked whether the country ought to be
less reliant on imported food. It's important to make sure that we cherish the
specialisms that we have in this country. A lot of people would be eating
turnips right now rather than thinking necessarily about aspects of lettuce and
tomatoes and similar. But I'm conscious that consumers want a year-round choice
and that is what our supermarkets and food producers and growers around the
world try to satisfy. But the government's position has been criticised by
Justin King, a former chief executive of Sainsbury's. He said the agricultural
sector had been significantly disrupted by Brexit and added that Whitehall's
unwillingness to help farmers cope with soaring energy costs limited how much
produce could be grown in heated greenhouses in the UK. This, he said, had left
the country uniquely exposed to imports at this time of year. In the city, the
100 share index ended the day down 23 points at 7,908. On Wall Street a short
time ago, the Dow Jones was down 213 points at 32,832. On the currency markets,
the pound is trading at $1.20 and against the euro, sterling is at 1.137. That
makes a euro worth 88.2 pence. A presenter on France's most popular television
news channel has been sacked amid allegations he ran reports commissioned by
outside interests. An investigation by the newspaper Le Monde and other
organisations identified secretive online groups which, for a fee, offered to
plant stories in the international media to influence public opinion. As Hugh
Scofield reports from Paris, the scandal may otherwise have gone unnoticed. This
is Rashid Mbaki, a veteran in BFM News, reading a report on his overnight
programme about sanctions on Russian superyachts, in the course of which he
mentions the name of a British blogger who he claims has been the source of much
disinformation on the subject. It was reports like this that started the
suspicions. Going out in the early hours, it would have barely registered with
the public, but the report was then picked up by a network of social media
accounts and suddenly began gaining traction. Undercover investigators have
found evidence that the yacht report and others originated in a secretive
Israeli company that offers its services to people, organisations or governments
who want to influence the news agenda. Its main tool? A system of tens of
thousands of fake social media accounts, like the ones that echoed the report on
the superyachts. Rashid Mbaki denied taking money for reading out the reports,
but he admitted bypassing BFM's editorial controls, and for that he has been
sacked. David Bowie's estate says the musician has taken his rightful place
among cultural icons after his personal archive was brought by the V&A Museum.
More than 80,000 items, including costumes, instruments and handwritten lyrics,
will be available for fans to view from 2025 at a new venue in East London. Our
music correspondent Mark Savage has more. The rock star we know as David Bowie
did not exist. He was invented by David Jones, a young musician from South
London with an incredible ability for metamorphosis. Now seven years after his
death, the V&A Museum has acquired Bowie's extraordinary archive, permanently
for everyone to see. From the famous Ziggy Stardust costumes, to the stylophone
he played on Space Oddity. Mary Finnegan was his landlady when he wrote that
song in 1969. He sat in my kitchen and said, would you like to hear my latest
song? And so me and the kids said, yes, please. And he sang Space Oddity and
played the stylophone part. And that was the first time that we heard that song.
After that breakout single, Bowie's musical curiosity and theatrical
performances inspired generations, as his biographer Tom Hagler explains.
Michael Jackson apparently went to all his shows in LA in 74. He was a young
lad, about 14, 15 that time. And Bowie went back home with him and the young
Michael quizzed him for most of the night about the choreography. So his
influence on black America, on everybody, is so incredible. Fans will get their
chance to study Bowie when the collection opens in 2025. The football
commentator John Motsen has died at the age of 77. Known affectionately as
Motti, he covered 10 World Cups, 10 European Championships and 29 FA Cup finals
for the BBC before retiring in 2018. The Prince of Wales, who was the president
of the FA, said Motsen was the voice of football. Our sports correspondent Andy
Swiss looks back on his 50-year career. Here's Gascoigne. Oh, brilliant. Oh,
yes. Oh, yes. His voice was as distinctive as his sheepskin coat. John Motsen
joined the BBC in 1968, but his big break came four years later when he
commentated on a famous FA Cup win for Hereford against Newcastle. Radford
again. Oh, what a goal! What a goal! Radford the scorer! Ronnie Radford! And the
crowd, the crowd are invading the pitch. Ronnie Radford's goal, he later said,
changed his life. When I see it again, as I have hundreds of times, I still
think to myself, please go in, don't hit the post. Because if that hadn't
nestled in the Newcastle net, no, I wouldn't be here now. Motsen went on to
commentate on nearly two and a half thousand games, including 10 World Cups, and
his enthusiastic style and encyclopedic knowledge turned him into a household
name. The BBC's director general, Tim Davie, described him as the voice of a
footballing generation, while Match of the Day presenter Gary Lineker also paid
tribute. He just always pitched it right, I felt. He got the big goals right. He
was almost an anorak, if you like, and I think you've got to be that a little
bit to be a commentator, certainly of his ilk. John Motsen's final BBC
commentary was at Crystal Palace in 2018, after which he was applauded by the
supporters. A fitting tribute to one of football's most famous voices. The
headlines again. Police have made three arrests in connection with the attempted
murder of a senior detective in Oma in County Tyrone last night. John Caldwell
remains in a critical condition in hospital. New figures show the number of
asylum seekers waiting for the Home Office to decide on their application is at
its highest ever level. The Premier League and other leading football
organisations have given a cautious welcome to plans which would see the men's
game independently regulated in England. One of the most recognisable voices in
sports commentary, John Motsen, has died. BBC News. Comedy next this evening as
the humorous David Sedaris returns to Radio 4 and the stage with his
observations on the human condition, all lovingly captured in his essays and
extensive diaries. That's in just a moment. On BBC iPlayer. Six robbers have
carried out an armed raid, stealing almost three tonnes of gold. Inspired by
Britain's biggest gold heist. How do you shift three tonnes of gold? Slowly.
There's £26 million worth of pure gold in the possession of people who didn't
expect to have it. If you could handle a job like this, then I'd have heard of
you. You only hear about the people who get caught. Stealing it was just the
start. We're looking for six robbers and three tonnes of gold. Every ring, every
watch. If you're looking for the gold, it's all around you. The Gold Watch on
BBC iPlayer. Now on Radio 4, David Sedaris, fresh from the lanes of West Sussex
with a new series of true stories and sometimes proactive thoughts with a
transatlantic angle. Ladies and gentlemen, meet David Sedaris. Thank you. That
was so nice of you to show up. I appreciate it. This is an essay that I wrote.
It was published in the New Yorker. Years ago, I used to write for Esquire
magazine. If something was in Esquire and if you didn't like it, it could have
been a bad essay. But if something's in the New Yorker and you don't like it,
there's something wrong with you. That's the general understanding. Happy go
lucky. Something about a car running over a policeman and a second officer being
injured. This is my assessment of a news story broadcast on the television in my
father's room at Springmore, the assisted living centre he's been in for the
past three years. It is early April, three days before his 98th birthday, and
Amy, Hugh and I have just flown to Raleigh from New York. Our plan is to hang
out for a while and then drive to our house on Emerald Isle, the C section. Dad
is in his wheelchair, dressed and groomed for our visit, hair combed, real shoes
on his feet, a red bandana tied around his neck. Well, hey, he calls as we walk
in, an old turtle raising his head toward the sun. Gosh, it's good to see you
kids. As Amy and I move in to embrace him, Hugh wonders if we could possibly
turn off the TV. Well, sure, my father, still smothered and grown children,
says. I don't even know why it's on to tell you the truth. Hugh takes the remote
off the bedside table and after he's killed the television, Amy asks if he can
figure out the radio. As a non-blood relative, that seems to be his role during
our visits to Springmore. The servant. Find us a jazz station, I tell him. There
we go, my father says. That would be fantastic. Neither Amy nor I care about the
news anymore, at least the political news. I am vaguely aware that my state's
governor has fallen out of favor and that people who aren't me will be receiving
government checks for some reason or other, but that's about it. When Trump was
president, I started every morning by reading the New York Times, followed by
the Washington Post, and would track both papers' websites regularly throughout
the day. To be less than vigilant was to fall behind. And was there anything
worse than not knowing what Stephen Miller just said about Wisconsin? My friend
Mike likened this constant monitoring to having a second job. It was exhausting.
And the moment that Biden was sworn into office, I let it all go. When the new
president speaks, I feel the way I do on a plane when the pilot announces that
after reaching our cruising altitude he will head due north or take a left at
Lake Erie. You don't need to tell me about your job, I always think. Just, you
know, do it. It's so freeing. No longer listening to political podcasts, no
longer being enraged. I still browse the dailies, skipping over the stories
about COVID, as I am finished with all that as well. The moment I got my first
shot of the vaccine, I started thinking of the coronavirus the way I think of
scurvy, something from a long ago time that can no longer hurt me, something
that mainly pirates get. My father tested positive for the coronavirus shortly
before Christmas. At around the time, he started wheeling himself to the front
desk at Springmore and asking if anyone there had seen his mother. He hasn't got
Alzheimer's, nothing that severe. Rather, he's what used to be called soft in
the head, gaga. It's a relatively new development, aside from the time he was
discovered on the floor of his house, dehydrated and suffering from a bladder
infection. He's always been not just lucid, but commanding. If it happens
several times in one day, someone on the staff will contact me, Lisa told us
over the phone. Then I'll call and say, Dad, your mother died in 1976 and is
buried beside your father at the Rural Cemetery in Cortland, New York. You
bought the plot next to theirs. So that's where you'll be going. There had to be
a gentler way to say this, but I'm not sure the news really registered,
especially after his diagnosis when he was at his weakest. Every time the phone
rang, I expected to hear that he had died. But my father recovered without being
hospitalized, I told my cousin Nancy. Plus, he lost 10 pounds. Not that he
needed to. When I asked him what it was like to have COVID, he offers a false
sounding laugh. He does that a lot now. Ha ha. I suspect it is a cover for his
failed hearing, that rather than saying, could you repeat that? He figures it a
safe bet that you were delivering a joke of some sort. Hugh and I just went to
Louisville to see his mother, I'd said to my dad the last time we were at
Springmore. Joan is 90 now and has blood cancer. Ha ha. That was on Halloween.
Socially distanced visits were allowed in the outdoor courtyard of my father's
building. And after our allotted 30 minutes were up, an aide disguised as a
witch wheeled him back to his room. Those costumes must do a real number on some
of the residents. Amy said as we walked with Hugh to our rental car. And then a
vampire came to take my blood pressure. Sure he did, grandpa. A few days after
we saw him, all visits were canceled and Springmore was locked down. No one in
or out except staff and all the residents confined to their rooms. The policy
wasn't reversed until six months later. That's when we flew down from New York
to see him. You look great, dad, Amy says in a voice that is almost but not
quite a shout. Hugh has finally found a jazz station and managed to tune out the
static. Well, I'm 100 years old, my father tells us. Can you beat that? 98, Amy
corrects him. And not quite yet. Your birthday is on Monday and today is only
Friday. A hundred years old. This isn't soft headedness, but a lifelong tendency
to exaggerate. What the hell are you still doing up? He demand of my brother, my
sisters and me every school night of our lives. It's one o'clock in the morning.
We'd point to the nearest clock. See, it's 945. It's one o'clock, damn it. Then
how come Columbo is still on? Go to bed. Amy has brought my father some
chocolate turtles. And as he looks on, she opens a box and hands him one. Your
room looks good, too. It's clean and your stuff fits in real well. It's not bad,
is it? My father says. You might not believe it, but this is the exact same
square footage as the house. This is simply not true. But we let it go. There
are a few things I'd like to get rid of, but as a whole, it's not too cluttered,
he observes, turning a jerky semi-circle in his wheelchair. That was a real
problem for me once upon a time. I used to be the king of clutter. Were I his
decorator, I'd definitely lose the Christmas tree that stands collecting dust on
the console beneath his TV. It is a foot and a half tall and made of plastic.
Naked, it might be okay, but its baubles, which are the size of juniper berries
and gaudy, depress me. Beside it is a stack of cards sent by people I don't know
or whose names I only vaguely recognize from the Greek Orthodox Church. Has a
priest been by? I ask. My father nods a few times. He doesn't much like me,
though. Amy takes a seat on the bed. Why not? He laughs. Let's just say I'm not
as generous as I could be. My father is thinner than the last time I saw him,
but somehow his face is fuller. Something else is different as well, but I can't
put my finger on it. It's like when celebrities get work done. I can see they've
undergone a change, but I can never tell exactly what it is. The eyes, the
mouth, I wonder, examining a photo on some gossip site. You don't look the same
for some reason, I say to my father. He turns from me to Hugh and then to Amy.
Well, you do. All of you do. The only one who's changed is me. I'm 100 years
old. 98 on Monday, Amy says. 100 years old. Have you had your COVID vaccine? I
ask, knowing that he has. I'm not sure, he says. Maybe. I pick up a salmon
carved out of something hard and porous, an antler maybe. It used to be in the
basement office at his house. This was before he turned every room into an
office and buried himself in envelopes. Hugh and me and Amy, we've each had one
shot. My father laughs. Well, good for you. I haven't had a drink since I got
here. At first I take this as a non sequitur. Then I realize that by shot, he
thinks we mean a shot of alcohol. They don't let you drink, I ask. Oh, you can
have a little, I guess, but it's not easy. You have to order in advance like
medicine and you only get a thimbleful, he says in his whisper of a voice. What
do you think would happen if you had a screwdriver, Amy asks. He thinks for a
moment. I'd probably get an erection. I really like this new version of my
father. He's charming and positive and full of surprises. One of the things I
like about us as a family is that we laugh, he says, always. As far back as I
can remember. It's what we're known for. Most of that laughter had been directed
at him and erupted the moment he left whichever room the rest of us were
occupying. A merriment club member, he definitely was not, but I like that he
remembers things differently. My offbeat sense of humor has won me a lot of
friends, he tells us, a hell of a lot. Friends here, Amy asks, all over the damn
place. Even the kids I used to roller skate with, they come by sometimes. He
opens his hand and we see that the chocolate turtle he's been holding has
melted. Amy fetches some toilet paper from the bathroom and he sits passively as
she cleans him off. What is it you're wearing, he asks. She takes a step back so
that we can see her black and white polka dot shift. Over it is a Japanese denim
shirt with coaster-sized smiley face patches running up and down the sleeves.
Her friend Paul recently told her that she dresses like a fat person, the
defiant sort who thinks, you want to laugh, I'll give you something to laugh at.
Interesting, my father says. Whenever the conversation stalls, he turns it back
to one of several subjects, the first being the inexpensive guitar he bought me
when I was a child and insisted on bringing with him to Springmore, this after
it had sat neglected in a closet for more than half a century. I'm trying to
teach myself to play, but I just can't find the time to practice. Seems to me
that all he has is time. What else is there to do here? Shut up in this room.
I've got to make some music, he says. As he shakes his fist in frustration, I
notice that he still has some chocolate beneath his fingernails. You're too hard
on yourself, Dad, Amy tells him. You don't have to do everything, you know.
Maybe it's okay just to relax for a change. His second go-to topic is the
artwork hanging on his walls, most of it bought by him and my mother in the 70s
and early 80s. Now this, he says, pointing to a framed seriograph over his bed.
This I could look at every minute of the day. It is a sentimental, naive-style
street scene of Paris in the early 20th century, a veritable checklist of tropes
and clichés by Michel Delacroix, who defines himself as a painter of dreams and
of the poetic past. On the two occasions when my father visited me in the actual
Paris, he couldn't leave fast enough. It's only in pictures that he can stand
the place. I've got to write this guy a letter and tell him what his work means
to me, he says. The trick is finding the damn time. Two of the paintings in the
room are by my father, done in the late 60s. His art phase came from nowhere,
and during its brief six-month span, he was prolific, churning out 20 or so
canvases, most done with a palette knife rather than a brush. All of them are
copies of Van Gogh, of Zubrin, and Picasso. I wouldn't fool anyone, but as
children we were awed by his talent. The problem was what to paint, or in his
case, to copy. Some of his choices were questionable. A stagecoach silhouetted
against a tangerine-colored sunset comes to mind, but in retrospect, it fit
right in with the rest of the house. Back in the 70s, we thought of our color
scheme as permanently modern. What would dare replace all that orange and brown
and avocado? By the early 80s, it was laughable, but now it's back, and we're
able to think fondly of our milk chocolate walls and the stout wicker burrow
that used to pout atop the piano. One of our father's acrylic bullfighters,
seemingly a fire on the wall behind it. When Dad retired from IBM, the artwork
became a greater part of his identity. He had been an engineer, but he was an
art lover. This didn't extend to museums. Who needed them when he had his living
room? I'm an actual collector, while David, he's more of an investor. He sniffed
to my friend Lee after I bought a Picasso that was painted by Picasso, and did
not look, dare I say it, like Kate Frosting. Then there's my father's collection
of masks, some of which are hanging high on the wall over his bed. The best of
them were made by tribes in the Pacific Northwest and Alaska, bought on fly
fishing trips. A few others are African or Mexican. They used to leer down from
the paneled wall above the staircase in our house, and it is odd, but not
unpleasant to see them in this new setting. When walking down the hall at
Springmore, I always peek into the other rooms, none of which resemble my
father's. There are the neighbors, and then there is dad. Dad who was listening
to Eric Dolphy and holding the guitar he has never in his life played. You know,
four of the strings on this thing came off my old violin, the one I had in grade
school. No, they didn't, but who cares? Before his mind started failing, my
father consumed a steady diet of Fox News and conservative talk radio that kept
him at a constant boiling point. Who's that black guy, he demanded in 2014. The
family was together at the C-section, and we were talking about Michael Brown,
who had been shot and killed three months earlier in Ferguson, Missouri. What
black guy, I asked. Oh, you know the one. Bill Cosby, Amy offered. Gil Scott
Heron, I asked. Stevie Wonder, Gretchen called from the living room. Lisa said,
Demzell Washington, you know who I mean, dad said. He's got that son. Jesse
Jackson, he's the one. Always stirring up trouble. Now though, our father has
taken a few steps back, and like me, seems all the better for it. How did you
feel when Biden was elected, I asked. The question is a violation of the pact
Amy and I made before arriving. Don't rile him up. Don't confuse him. Actually,
he says, I was for that other one. Hugh says, Trump. My father nods. That's
right. I believed what he was telling us. And well, it seems that I was wrong.
That guy was bad news. Never did I expect to hear this. Trump was bad, and I was
wrong. Practically in the same breath. Who are you? I want to ask the gentle
gnome in front of me. And what have you done with Lou Sedaris? So Biden, I guess
he's okay, my father says, looking with his red bandana like the leftist he
never was. Amy, Hugh and I are just recovering when an aide walks in and
announces that it is five o'clock, time for dinner. I'll wheel Mr. Sedaris down.
Oh, we'll take him, Amy says. Take what? My father asks, confused by the sudden
activity. I push him out the door and pass the TV upon which the news is
playing. Again, the incident at the Capitol, someone hit by a car, someone shot.
This is like that old joke, I say to my father as we near the dining room. A man
bitches to his wife. You're always pushing me around and talking behind my back.
And she says, what do you expect? You're in a wheelchair. My father roars. The
dining room, which fits maybe six tables, is full when we arrive. Women greatly
outnumber men. And no one except for us and the staff is ambulatory. The air
should smell like food, but instead it smells like Amy, her perfume. She wears
so much that it manages to both precede her and trail behind her, lingering long
after she's moved on. That said, I like it. A combination of five different
scents, none of which is flowery or particularly sweet. It leaves her smelling
like a strange cookie, maybe one with pencil shavings in it. Eat, why don't you?
My father says. I am conscious of everyone watching. Visitors. Lou has visitors.
While Hugh and Amy talk to an aide, my father looks up and pats the space beside
him at the table. Stay for dinner. They can make you anything you want. I can't
remember my mother's last words to me. They were delivered over the phone at the
end of a casual conversation. See you, she might have said, or I'll call back in
a few days. And in the thoughtless way you respond when you think you have
forever with the person on the other end of the line. I likely said, okay. My
father's last words to me, spoken in the too hot, too bright dining room at his
assisted living facility three days before his 98th birthday are, don't go yet.
Don't leave. My last words to him, and I think they're as telling as his, given
all we've been through, are, we need to get to the beach before the grocery
store is closed. They look cold on paper. And when he dies a few weeks later,
and I realize they are the last words I said to him, I will think, maybe I can
warm them up on stage when I read this part out loud. But rather than thinking
of his death, I will be thinking of the story of his death. So much so that
after his funeral, Amy will ask, did I see you taking notes during the service?
There'll be no surprise in her voice. Rather, it will be the way you might
playfully scold a squirrel. Did you just jump up from the table and completely
empty that bird feeder? The squirrel in me, it's in our nature. Though maybe not
forever. For our natures, I have just recently learned from my father, can
change. Or maybe they're simply revealed. And the dear, cheerful man I saw that
afternoon at Springmore was there all along, smothered in layers of rage and
impatience that burned away as he blazed into the homestretch. For the moment
though, leaving the dining room in the company of Hugh and Amy, I'm thinking
that we'll have to do this again and soon fly to Raleigh. See dad, maybe have a
picnic in his room. I'll talk Gretchen into coming. Lisa will be there too. And
our brother Paul, all of us together and laughing so loudly we'll be asked by
some aid to close the door because really, isn't that what we're known for? I
was going to read a few things here from my diary. April 23, 2011. Tempe,
Arizona. A joke from last night's book signing. A woman leaps through the
morning paper and looks up at her husband. It says here that women in Las Vegas
get a hundred dollars every time they have sex. That sounds like a pretty good
deal, so I'm going to move there. I'll go with you, her husband tells her. I
want to see how you live on $200 a year. September 2, 2020. Rackham, West
Sussex. Andrew and I had dinner together at the pub last night. Did you see the
picture of that graffiti covered wall somewhere in the US, he asked as we pulled
our Xerox menus from a pot in the center of the table? It originally said Black
Lives Matter. Then someone added an O. So now it's Black Olives Matter. October
23, 2021. Chicago. The highlight of yesterday was my four hour drive from
Springfield to St. Louis with Katie, who is 38 and on her second marriage. On
our way we passed many billboards that advertised the wonders of Uranus, an
unfortunately named town that decided after years of being made fun of to double
down and make the best of it. They now have a fudge factory, Katie explained.
That was noted on one of the billboards which read the best fudge comes from
Uranus. Others included big fun in Uranus and explore Uranus. It was one of
those things that never stopped being funny. The Great David Sedaris was written
and read by David Sedaris. The producer was Steve Doherty and it was a giddy
goat production for the BBC. David will be back with more stories next week and
in case you missed it you'll find his recent turn on Desert Island Discs on BBC
Sounds. What do the critics make of a new immersive art exhibition featuring
David Hockney's work? More on that on Front Row in 15 minutes. On Radio 4… Our
Father, who art in heaven… We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third party services and platforms and the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds.