TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 That's how the forecast's looking. On FM, Longwave and BBC Sounds, this is BBC
Radio 4. Hello, good evening. It's 10 o'clock. Welcome to The World Tonight. I'm
Julian Warwick here. It's the Chinese-owned app that's been downloaded three and
a half billion times, including by some politicians. Hi, folks, this is Boris
Johnson here, launching the number 10 TikTok site. So tune in to number 10
TikTok. But as the US government orders all its federal employees to delete the
app because of security concerns, echoing moves in Canada and by the EU, is time
running out for TikTok? Under proposed changes to UK law, children born via
sperm or egg donation wouldn't need to wait until adulthood to find out more
about their biological parents. What difference could that make? We hear from a
woman who met her donor father when she was 39. I look just like him. And I
think there's just so much validation in having now know the truth. And in my
opinion, a known donor is always the best way. And... What time is it on the
moon? The European Space Agency wants the moon to have its own time zone. We ask
how that could work. That's all after the BBC News, read tonight by Tina
Ritchie. Ritchie Soonak has urged Conservative MPs not to allow debates over his
new agreement with the EU to become a Westminster drama and said he was
confident they would back it. The Prime Minister addressed the 1922 Committee of
Tory backbenchers at Westminster after meeting business people and politicians
in Belfast. He promised to give Northern Ireland's Democratic Unionist Party the
time and the space to consider the deal. As our political correspondent David
Wallace-Lockhart reports. Ritchie Soonak was welcomed in the traditional way,
with MPs banging the desks. Largely, his party appear happy with his new deal,
the Windsor Framework, aimed at making it easier to trade between Northern
Ireland and the rest of the UK. But some influential groups have yet to signal
that they're happy. The DUP, the largest unionist party in Northern Ireland,
want time to look at the small print. Mr Soonak said it was important that they
were allowed to do so. And the European Research Group of Eurosceptic Tory MPs
want their lawyers to go through the deal with an extremely fine tooth comb.
Their chairman, Marc François, said this could take two weeks. Getting the
approval of these two groups of MPs would be a great achievement. But there are
rumblings of disquiet. Boris Johnson's former Brexit negotiator, Lord Frost, has
tonight said elements of the deal remain a bitter pill to swallow. The SNP is
facing criticism over its decision to exclude journalists from leadership
hustings during the race to choose Nicola Sturgeon's successor. The BBC, STV,
ITN and Sky have joined together to challenge the ban. The SNP is planning nine
debates in the coming weeks. A spokesperson for the party said the hustings had
been designed as a safe space where party members can question the candidates,
Ash Regan, Kate Forbes and Humza Yousaf. A transgender woman has been sentenced
to eight years in prison for raping two women when still a man. Isla Bryson,
who's 31 and from Clydebank, committed the crimes while known as Adam Graham.
Last month, the case sparked a heated debate over whether Bryson should be held
in a male or a female prison. In sentencing at the High Court in Edinburgh, the
judge, Lord Scott, criticised Bryson's refusal to accept responsibility while
acknowledging their traumatic childhood. Your vulnerability is no excuse at all
for what you did to these two women in 2016 and 2019. Regardless of your own
vulnerability, in a period of just under three years, you raped two women who
can both be regarded as vulnerable. The parents of a missing two-month-old baby
have been arrested on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. Constance
Martin, who comes from a wealthy background, and her boyfriend Mark Gordon, a
convicted sex offender, were detained last night in Brighton. They'd been in
hiding since the child was born earlier last month. The baby has still not been
found. From Brighton, our Home Affairs correspondent Daniel Sanford reports.
What started as a mystery is now turning into a potential tragedy. It began with
a couple and a newborn baby on the run, apparently trying to evade the
authorities. But now Constance Martin and Mark Gordon have been found and
there's no sign of the baby. And the couple, who the police think may have been
sleeping outdoors for several weeks, have been arrested on suspicion of gross
negligence manslaughter. Police in Israel have released all eight Jewish
settlers they'd arrested in connection with an attack on a Palestinian town in
the occupied West Bank. A spokesman said three of them were now under house
arrest. One Palestinian was killed on Sunday when hundreds of Jewish settlers
descended on the Palestinian town of Huara, burning homes and cars. The attack
followed the killing of two Israeli brothers in the area. The European
Parliament has banned its staff from using the Chinese video-sharing app TikTok.
The US and Canadian governments, as well as the European Commission, have also
taken similar measures because of fears that China could use the app to harvest
users' data or advance its interests. Here, however, the Science Secretary,
Michelle Donilon, has said she's seen no evidence that TikTok poses a security
risk. Our technology editor Zoe Clyman says there's little hard evidence to the
contrary. What TikTok says, and actually has been backed up independently, is
that it's not really collecting any more data than any of the other social
networks are. Things like your location, the device you're using, what other
apps on those devices. It's all been used to basically sell ads to you. The
other social networks do exactly the same thing. The difference is, of course,
they're all US-owned and there's a lot less suspicion and scrutiny, I suppose,
about what the US companies are doing versus what this Chinese company is doing.
More strikes have been announced for the 15th of March, the day when the
Chancellor Jeremy Hunt is to present his new budget. The PCS union, which
represents civil servants, says the number of its members expected to walk out
on the day has risen from about 100,000 to 133,000. Staff at HMRC and the Care
and Quality Commission have voted to join industrial action by people working in
government departments and organisations such as Ofsted and Border Force.
Separately, the RMT union said its members on the London Underground would also
stage a strike on the 15th. Tube drivers belonging to the Aslef union will also
walk out on the same day. The charity Crisis says alarm bells should be ringing
in government after official data suggested a rise in the number of rough
sleepers in England. More than 3,000 people were found on the streets on a
single night last autumn. That's 626 more than in 2021. Ministers say rough
sleeping remains below pre-pandemic levels and £2 billion is being invested to
try to tackle the issue. The founder of the big issue, Lord Byrd, says there
needs to be a change of strategy. The government has to take a holistic view of
this and not saying, oh, we can't spend money here. Why is it that the Treasury
is always prepared to spend money when the crisis has happened? They don't spend
money to prevent the crisis from happening. And that's exactly what we need. The
Danish Parliament has passed a controversial bill aboriging a public holiday to
raise more money for the armed forces in the wake of Russia's invasion of
Ukraine. It means the Danes will no longer celebrate the Great Prayer Day, a
religious holiday they'd observed since the 17th century. The government says it
will generate an additional £355 million for the defence budget. Tina, thank
you. You're listening to The World Tonight with Julian Woricker. If you work for
the federal government in the United States and you have the Chinese-owned video
sharing app TikTok on your government-issued phone, you have 30 days to remove
it. The order has come from the White House, with the Biden administration
saying it's to protect the security and privacy of people working for government
agencies. The White House itself and other departments have already barred the
app. TikTok says the move would censor the voices of millions of Americans. But
one congressman said TikTok users were giving the Chinese Communist Party,
quote, a backdoor to all their personal information. The order in the US follows
similar moves by the EU and Canada in recent weeks. Well, Joe Tidy is the BBC's
cyber correspondent. So, Joe, what are the Americans worried about here? Well,
there are three main fears here. The first is that TikTok collects an excessive
amount of data. That's been something that's been levelled at TikTok for years
now. But all the evidence really points to a consensus in the cybersecurity
world that actually, yes, TikTok takes a huge amount of data from users, so
that's location, what videos you watch, which ones you comment on, the device
details. But actually, that's no real difference than other apps like Instagram
and Facebook and the rest of them. The other two fears are around what they do
with that data. So the first is that it could be used in some way as a spying
tool. So TikTok is owned by a Chinese tech giant called ByteDance. And there is
a law which is often cited, which was passed in 2017 by the Chinese Communist
Party that says that if compelled to, organizations and citizens must help in
national security efforts. So the worry is that that data will somehow be handed
over to the Chinese government as and when the pressure gets piled on to
ByteDance. Obviously, the company says they would never do that. And the third
thing is using that data and using the algorithms of TikTok, there's a fear that
they could use the trends and the popular videos in order to in some way
brainwash people in the West by tweaking an algorithm here and there. The fear
is they might be able to sway opinion, perhaps in political situations or at
times of conflict. Are there examples of China interfering with TikTok users?
No, there is no evidence at the moment that this has ever happened. So the two
things thereof, algorithm changes or handing data over to the Chinese
government. There are instances of controversial decisions taken by the company.
For example, in December it admitted that there were some employees based in
Beijing who had been spying on journalists in the U.S. and elsewhere. And they
admitted that there was a handful of rogue employees who were trying to track
down some people who were leaking information about TikTok to journalists. And
therefore, the employees logged in to find the IP address of those journalists
and find out whether or not they have been physically close to the suspected
leakers. Those people have been sacked and TikTok has said that that will never
happen again. But overall, TikTok faces this sort of a similar amount of
controversies as other social networks. But it's this idea, of course, that this
is the first mainstream global app that isn't a U.S. company. Joe, thank you
very much. Joe Tidy, our cyber correspondent. So there are measures against
TikTok being taken in the U.S. and I mentioned in Canada and at the European
Union as well. So what about here in the UK, where some leading politicians are
increasingly using the app for a little bit of self-promotion? Hi, folks, this
is Boris Johnson here launching the Number 10 TikTok site. And you won't
necessarily catch me dancing on this site, but you will have all sorts of stuff
about what we're doing to deliver on our priorities. So tune in to Number 10
TikTok. So hi, yes, this is really me. I'm just using TikTok as another platform
to show people what it is that I do as secretary of state at DCMS. So I know
that my TikTok followers love to see where I work. This is the most incredible
view out of the office from the business department, Bays. And here is my
office. I'm a newbie at this, so I'm ready to do it. We're off, right? Let's go.
Boris Johnson, Nadine Dorries and Grant Shapps talking to their TikTok
followers. And I'm joined by my colleague, Lelicia Cairns, the Conservative MP
for Rutland and Melton and chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee at
Westminster. Good evening. Good evening. Where do you stand on what the
government should say with regards to its employees and TikTok? Well, look, as a
country for too long, we've slept walked into becoming bedfellows with data
exploiting technologies. And they are, you know, everyday parts of our lives. We
spent weeks talking about balloons in the stratosphere, when actually it is
technologies in our pockets that are actually making us more at risk. And to my
mind, the government does need to review its policies. And there should be a ban
on government officials and parliamentary staff installing this app on any
mobile phones used for work. Just this app because of the Chinese connection?
It's because of the fact it's owned by ByteDance. And as your correspondent
said, the company has admitted that its internal audit team used data to try and
hunt down sources that we're talking journalists. But the reality is this is a
dangerous app altogether. If you're an identity thief, if you're a hostile
government, the information they can get off it is so valuable if you want to
target specific individuals. Let's look at what the government has said on this
subject. Michelle Donilon, the Science and Technology Secretary, has said in an
interview published today that, and I quote, there was no evidence that there is
a necessity to ban people from using TikTok, which suggests that she's not on
the same page as you. So I think, I suspect that Michelle there was talking
about everyone across the entire country. And I think there's an interesting
point there because, look, I believe people should be able to make their own
choices. But I do think we need an informed discussion across our country,
particularly with our children, about the importance of our data. Because data
does make us vulnerable. It reveals our networks, our locations, our interests,
our habits, our pattern of life. Whether you're a hostile state or an identity
thief, TikTok is the utter dream for those who are seeking to exploit us or
target those around us. So when it comes to the average member of the public,
they should be able to make a choice, but they need to make an informed choice.
And we're not having enough of a public discussion about this. You would,
though, acknowledge that most other social media and mobile apps do pretty much
the same thing, wouldn't you? So they do collect a lot of data as well. But the
difference here is we do not know where the data is going. And as your
correspondent said, there is a law that requires all Chinese companies to submit
the data they hold to the Chinese government if they are asked. And the reality
is that does put us at risk. And as I said, there are also concerns around
censorship. So internal TikTok documents, encouraging people to suppress posts
from people who are ugly or poor. The fact that we know China runs influence
operations on its own other platforms, so for example, WeChat in China to
control and stop people from seeing, for example, protests taking place in
China. And as we said, we know for a fact that its own employees have used it to
hunt down people. So these aren't what ifs. We know that the data is being
abused already. TikTok says it's in the process of creating a series of data
stores around the world, including in Ireland, where UK user data is now
processed. Would that be the solution? In other words, we're talking about
TikTok user data, which is not stored in China. No, because the data that was
accessed to hunt down the Financial Times and BuzzFeed journalist sources, that
was members of staff based in China and the United States accessing the data of
British journalists. So it doesn't make a difference. It's about the employees
being able to access data from around the world, which when TikTok gave evidence
to the Foreign Affairs Committee, they told us that couldn't happen. And they've
refused to come back and give evidence in public in front of my committee again
since that took place. Some lawmakers in the United States are pushing for an
outright ban of the app throughout the country. Would you go that far? Look, it
is a difficult one because ultimately I am concerned about the enormous
vulnerabilities for young people and that we give away through our data. For
now, I prefer us to have an educated conversation in the public for people to
make their own choices. We need to have personal responsibility coming back into
the national conversation when it comes to security and defence. So for now, I'm
not calling for an outright ban, but there's no question that government
officials and politicians and parliamentary staff should not have it on any app
that could make them or our country more vulnerable. Alicia Kenz, thank you very
much indeed for coming on the programme. People who donate sperm or eggs could
be identified as soon as the baby is born if a proposal being put forward by the
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority becomes law. At present, children
born as a result of such donations must wait until they're 18 to obtain
information about their biological parents. The HFEA said that the law should be
updated so this information can be made available after the birth of a child
should the donor choose. Laura Bridgens was donor conceived but only found out
as an adult. She told me more of her story. So I'm only two years into my
discovery, so I found out in February 2021 at the age of 39. So I'm what is
known as a late discovery donor conceived adult, so I'm from the era before the
HFEA even existed. And I just wanted to do an ancestry test. I was just curious.
I'm quite into kind of self-discovery and learning about who I am and I was just
interested. But did you suspect there was something there? I had questioned
things my whole life. Absolutely. I had a challenging relationship with my dad.
He died in 2018 and he was estranged from his family. So in that sense, I had
always had this blank space on my paternal side, which is quite unusual. How did
you actually find out? My mum told me. My mum came to me on Christmas Day and
she'd wrapped up the DNA tests and written me a letter basically. And it all
just came out basically. We were sat in my car and she just had basically just
kept this secret for almost 40 years. And she'd thought about telling me, but
you know, the narrative at the time was to just forget about it, go home and be
a family. So it was very much what the doctors said. So then having received
that information, it was about deciding to track down your biological father.
Yes. And how did that happen? It felt really important to me. As soon as I, I
mean, I didn't even know the right terms. You know, I'm a donor conceived adult.
I'm donor conceived, but I didn't even know what that term meant at the time. So
I mean, I've been lucky. I matched with a third cousin who was really into
family history and he was able to tell me quite a lot. But my breakthrough came
on a different DNA website where I matched with a first cousin. And from that,
it was really quite easy. I found my donor had not moved since 1997. The line of
work he was in meant that I found him on Companies House. And I mean, it took me
six months to write a letter, but I did write a letter and I'm one of the lucky
ones. I've been welcomed. So his reaction was positive straight away? It was. I
mean, his initial letter came four days after I sent my first letter and it was
a measured response. He wasn't surprised. I think he was taken aback. I've since
met him twice and I've met his children and I look just like him. And I think
that's ultimately, there's just so much validation in having now know the truth.
You know, I have not had the door shut on me. I've been given family history,
photographs. I mean, his three adult children and me, we've got such similar
kind of interests in our careers, like parallel. I look more like my biological
father than his other three children. You know, there's that kind of, you know,
that kind of genetic mirroring that I hadn't ever had in my life. As you said
initially, you came to this comparatively late compared with a lot of other
people. If you'd been able to know this a lot earlier in life, and we're now
talking about the possibility of people having access to this information from
the moment they are born, what difference would it have made to you? Would it
have been a positive thing? Absolutely. I just cannot stress how much I believe
that at the end of the day, it's humans that are being created. And in today's,
the technology in direct to consumer DNA testing, that the truth will come out.
Well, I was about to say, I mean, there clearly are increasingly lots of
different ways in which people can find this out anyway. So that is changing the
situation, whether people like it or not, isn't it? It really is. So the rise in
direct to consumer DNA testing and the availability of it has really given
people like me agency and control to find the information that we deserve to
have about ourselves, which a lot of people just take for granted. And the law
is just maybe starting to catch up a little bit. And in my opinion, a known
donor is always the best way. That was Laura Bridgens. Well, the proposal from
the HFVA is one of a number they're putting forward to reflect some of the
fertility practices which have emerged in recent years. They include alerting
parents and donors to those DNA testing websites which children could access and
having more power to clamp down on poorly performing clinics. Well, Peter
Thompson is chief executive of the HFVA. Peter, good evening. Evening, Julian.
So children must currently wait until the age of 18 to obtain information about
their biological parents, and this recommendation is for a change so that
information could available straight away with donor consent, I must stress. So
why put that forward? Well, I think Laura's story is a perfect example of why we
think it's now the right time to have a conversation about changing the law on
this. So when the HFVA Act first passed, I mean, it was a groundbreaking piece
of legislation back in 1990. Anonymity if you like was the presumption around
donation. Views have changed over time, and the law was amended back in 2005 to
allow donor conceived people when they became an adult at 18 to have access to
certain identifiable information. But of course, a lot's changed since then. And
as Laura says, what's now come onto the market with a huge increase in things
like these ancestry websites and cheap DNA testing kits is that if you like the
old presumptions about confidentiality, we don't think are going to hold
anymore. So even if people opt or don't want to tell their child, and
professional advice is it's good to tell early, in fact, actually now there are
many ways in which people can find out. So today we've issued a consultation. As
you say, it's one of a number of proposals, and the idea is that we think if you
like the law should move to a choice where people can either decide to keep with
the regime pretty much like we have at the moment. In other words, you can
access identifiable information at 18, or you could access that information much
earlier. But how do you maintain safety and ethical soundness when all of these
choices are suddenly existing which didn't before? I think the key thing here is
about consent. So obviously, both the donor and the parents involved need to
consent to the idea of early identifiable information being available. So what
would be entirely wrong is if a donor didn't want to consent to their
information being available until 18, then you know, you can't give that
information to parents, as you say, shortly after birth. So it requires consent.
The proposal we've put out today in a consultation, as I say, effectively gives
people that kind of choice. And crucially as well, I mean, if you get then the
information from what we hold on the HFPA, it comes with all sorts of advice,
people get access to support and the like. So there's a sense in which we have
to accommodate, we think, the new reality around confidentiality, but we believe
you can do that in an ethical way. I mentioned other things within your
consultation document. The regulator wanting broader powers, for example, to
address fertility services outside licensed fertility clinics. What are you
worried about there? Well, the old Act, the Act as it currently exists, again,
is a predate social media and a growth in a whole series of facilities in which
the presumption is, if you like, that all of the licensable activity takes place
in a licensed clinic. But in truth now, there are all sorts of ancillary
services offering health advice, wellness and the like that fall outside of the
licensed scheme. And from the perspective of the patient, you know, their
fertility journey, if you like, is a combination often of not just the
licensable treatment, but also all sorts of other advice. And we think it makes
sense because we want to put the patient at the heart of any new fertility law
to kind of think about all of the interactions they have in seeking treatment
and to bring them under one consistent regulatory umbrella. Briefly, this is all
out for consultation at the moment. What's the timetable from here? It is. So
it's issued today, Julia, and we're out for six weeks. Clearly then we don't
change the law. That's a matter for government and ultimately parliament. We'll
be putting some proposals to the Department of Health around the summer. And
then we'll be working with the department to see where the next steps are from
there. But I mean, fertility law in this country has often gone about change in
a quite considered and thoughtful way. And I think that's the sort of process
here. So we're starting a conversation, but we're not looking at a new law, you
know, quickly. If any of your listeners are interested in responding, all they
need to do is go to the HFEA website. It's www.hfea.gov.uk. It's a short
consultation. We'd love to hear from as many people as possible. Peter, thank
you very much indeed for coming on. For a moment at the weekend, there seemed to
be a glimmer of hope in the Middle East as the Israeli government and the
Palestinian Authority announced a joint commitment to take steps to end the
recent surge of violence in the West Bank. It emerged from rare talks in Jordan,
also attended by the US and by Egyptian officials. But if the test of that
commitment was the impact it would have on the ground, then it's conspicuously
failed to make a difference. The violence has, if anything, worsened and there
are fears it could continue to do so. Earlier, I spoke to our Middle East
correspondent, Tom Bateman. The region hasn't seen anything on this scale,
certainly as far as the death toll for Palestinians is concerned, since the days
of the second intifada or the second Palestinian uprising two decades ago. And
the numbers of Israelis being killed as well, that is unprecedented for the best
part of a decade. These are extremely dangerous times. And I think the other
factor is the way in which this is coinciding with deep political changes
really, both among Israelis and Palestinians. You know, we have the most
nationalist right-wing government, including members of the pro-settler far-
right fringes of Israeli politics thrust right into the heart of Israeli
government. And at the same time, you have in the Palestinian Authority a
deterioration both of security control in the West Bank and a crisis of
leadership with an ageing and out of touch and unpopular leadership. Palestinian
politics is divided as ever. So I think when you put all those things together,
these are extremely difficult and concerning times. When there are attacks, when
they're violent, when people die in them, what's the process whereby which
they're properly investigated? What we witnessed in the occupied West Bank on
Sunday night in the Palestinian town of Hawara was a rampage by Israeli
settlers. They had vowed to take revenge after the shooting dead by a
Palestinian government of two Israeli settlers, two brothers. And the events
then culminated in a rampage through the town. It fanned out over a wide
geographical area. Palestinian was killed and many, many wounded. I was there
yesterday and the sense that I got from people there was that the Israeli army
and border police were not only not reacting, but were actively protecting the
settlers. People told me that Palestinians were being shot at while the settlers
attacked. Later there was the shooting dead of an Israeli American in the
occupied West Bank. Now the responses to the two things, given that Israel has
overarching security control across the West Bank fundamentally, have been very
divergent. So for example, we've seen the near full closure of two Palestinian
cities as they search for the gunmen involved in the killing of the Israelis. As
far as the situation in terms of a legal process or process to try and find all
the settlers that attacked, and we were talking about hundreds in Hawara, eight
people were arrested. They've all been released from custody. I think a handful
under house arrest still, but none of them remaining custody. So you have a
clear divergence of approach. Having said that, the Israeli army has said today,
described these as serious calamities and the chief of staff saying they will be
thoroughly investigated. I think human rights groups have said they've sort of
heard that thing before, but what tends to happen in their view is a whitewash.
There was this summit in Jordan of the weekend where Israeli and Palestinian
officials pledged to de-escalate tensions. How does that sit against everything
that you're witnessing at the moment? The timing in a sense couldn't be worse
because as this summit was taking place, we saw this very serious outbreak of
violence on the same day, within hours of all of this happening on the ground.
Which means this could get even worse than it is now. It's hard to see how
politics in the short term can provide a solution to this. Tom Bateman, our
Middle East correspondent. Well, Danny Danon is a senior figure within Likud,
the party led by the Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Mr Danon is a
former Israeli ambassador to the UN and is currently chairman of World Likud. I
asked for his reaction to the recent violence. We are facing a wave of terror.
Two major incidents, which in one of them, two teenagers were shot in daylight
in a main street in the village of Hawara. And only last night, another incident
where an American Israeli was shot next to Jericho. That's something we cannot
accept. At the same time, we do condemn any act of violence. And when a few
Israeli teenagers took the law into their hands, we condemned it. You're
referring to what happened on Sunday, where, according to the police, hundreds
of Jewish settlers descended on the Palestinian town of Hawara after the killing
of those two Israeli brothers. And again, according to the police, for hours
they went on a rampage, setting fire to houses and cars. That's surely not
remotely acceptable, is it? It's not acceptable. That's something that the
authorities should take care of and press charges against those who took part in
those illegal activities. The president of Israel, the prime minister of Israel,
we all condemned those acts of violence. Let me stay with those hundreds of
Jewish settlers doing as they did, though, for a moment. Because again, we had
eight suspects detained. They've all been released. And we've had reports from
the ground quoting various Palestinians saying that the security forces stood
back while that was happening. Those issues are still under investigation. But
if the security forces stood back at that point, if the security forces stood
back at that point, should they be held to account for that? With all due
respect, I think it's unacceptable that we are actually speaking about those
demonstrations, and we are not speaking about the terror attacks in daylight in
the middle of the street. A Palestinian took the lives of two innocent Israelis.
But I don't think it's acceptable that the discussion will be about those
demonstrations and not about the wave of terror that we are facing today in
Israel. Well, rest assured, when we have Palestinian voices on the program, we
ask them rigorous questions about what is going on on their side of this. But as
you are from Likud, I naturally concentrate on Israeli policy. Can I just go
back to that point that I made about the security forces allegedly, and I stress
allegedly, standing back in those circumstances? If that happened, what should
be the consequences for those security forces? Today I criticize our security
forces, because I think they should have actually taken extremer measures after
the terror attack to put full curfew on the village, which they didn't. And I
think if they would have done that, I think it would have actually prevented
anyone from walking in the streets that night. And I think that's what we should
do now. We should put full siege on the village of Hawara and the city of
Jericho until we capture to commit this horrible crime. The problem that the
military didn't do it because they didn't want to disturb the civilians who were
not involved. So a full siege, irrespective of the consequences that would
naturally arise from that for the civilian population living in those places?
Absolutely. We cannot continue with our lives after such horrible crimes. This
is not how you fight terrorism. Would you not acknowledge, though, that this
ever tougher approach is one that the Israeli government, irrespective of its
makeup, over many years has tried and tried and the consequences are always more
violence and more deaths? I beg to differ with you. Where's the fresh thinking
in what you have just said? We want to live peacefully in the region. We want to
sign peace deals like we signed with the UAE, with Bahrain, with Egypt, with
Jordan. But if our lives will be under danger, we will have no choice but to use
our strengths in order to secure the lives of Israelis, even if it means that
the lives of the Palestinians will not be as pleasant as we want them to be.
There are chosen policies being pursued by the current coalition government in
Israel, aren't there? The government has authorised nine Jewish settlements in
the West Bank, which were previously unauthorised outposts. We've had a
statement from Mr Netanyahu's office in the last week saying that a planning
committee would convene in the coming days to approve new settlement homes.
That's not going to help peace, is it? You know, what we heard, you know, after
so many years that there were no construction in many of those areas, I think
it's not enough. It's not enough? No, absolutely not. We should have no
limitations of building in our land. But you know what the Palestinians think
about settlements? Nobody is counting the number of apartments that are being
built in London every week. That's because in London, they're not illegal. I
don't see the distinction between Muslim, Jews or Christians who want to live in
this area. There's plenty of land for everybody here. Danny Danon of Likud in
Israel. The drought in the Horn of Africa is expected to stretch into its sixth
failed rainy season. Kenya, Somalia and Ethiopia are the worst affected
countries as climate change makes dry spells worse. Thousands of Somalis are
fleeing their country as they seek safety and help in neighbouring Kenya. Our
Africa correspondent Catherine Biorahunga has been to the Dadaab camp where more
than a hundred thousand people have arrived in less than a year. Through the
night and into the early morning, new arrivals from Somalia make their way to
some of the camps in Dadaab. And often they settle on the outskirts of these
camps. I can see hundreds of small huts that have been made by people who've
arrived. They're made out of pieces of stick, cloth or mats. Aiden Ali's family
arrived here two days ago. They're fleeing the worst drought in decades, caused
by at least five failed rainy seasons and with a sixth one likely on its way.
It's much worse compared to the previous droughts. No water, the dams are dry, a
lot of people have died, let alone animals, due to drought and hunger. It's not
easy here either. We borrow food from the neighbours. You cannot borrow food
from someone you borrowed from yesterday. Hindiyah Ali is helping her 98-year-
old ailing mother drink some tea. Despite decades of conflict and hunger in
Somalia, this is the first time they have fled their home. The war and the
drought has gotten worse. The bullets are always flying. If the animals you were
milking, some are robbed and others killed, what would you do? That's what's
happening. I have lost 50 people from my family. Others were shot while others
died of hunger. We have run away from hunger and war. Without basic facilities
like shelter and toilets, living conditions here are deplorable. The
overcrowding is putting huge pressure on crucial facilities in the camps. Yaya
Aden is admitted at a Medicins Sans Frontieres-run hospital in Dadaab with her
grandmother Habiba Mohamed. She is a year old but looks too small for her age.
The child is not feeding well since she's had diarrhoea. We do not have enough
food to eat. This child has not been breastfed since she was born. The mother is
mentally ill. What can she breastfeed? Once a month, thousands of refugees,
including the new arrivals, come into this crowded food distribution warehouse
to receive cereals and cooking oil. And the numbers keep increasing. The head of
the UN Refugee Agency in Dadaab is Guy Avignon. The same facilities are having
to cater for more people. And the funding situation is not improving. We got a
slight increase of our budget recently, but nothing compared to the magnitude of
the needs. The UN has announced a fresh appeal for funding to help communities
affected by this crisis in East Africa, as three years of painful drought are
expected to continue over the next three months. Well that is Time from the Pink
Floyd album Dark Side of the Moon, a track you're hearing because it ties in
very neatly with a recommendation from the European Space Agency. Scientists
there want us to know what time it is on the Moon. They say an agreed time zone
would make it easier for different space agencies from around the world to work
together. And it could also mean more precise map guidance and navigation on the
lunar surface. And this comes at a time when different countries plan to travel
to and work more on the Moon in the coming years. Dr Megan Argo is a senior
lecturer in astrophysics at the University of Central Lancashire. Megan, good
evening. Good evening. So what do you make of this recommendation? It sounds
like a really sensible idea. As you say, there's lots and lots of missions that
are planned for the next few years going to the Moon, not least NASA's Artemis,
which involves quite a lot of missions in itself. And these missions are all
going to need to work together. They're going to need to share communications,
positional information. And currently for most of our deep space missions, most
of the satellites that we have out in the solar system, the communications back
to Earth relies on a preset schedule of links with ground stations here on the
Earth. That's not sustainable with so many missions planned because there isn't
enough ground station capacity to handle that. So one solution is to set up
essentially a network of satellites around the Moon, so equivalent to the kind
of GPS networks that we have around the Earth. But to have a GPS network
functioning, you need to have very, very accurate time systems in order to
actually make it function. So having a defined lunar time standard more than a
time zone, that's something that is really fundamental to making that sort of
positioning system work that will help these missions in the future. So how
would you decide what time it is? Well, that's a difficult question. So if you
consider how this works for the International Space Station, so that space
station orbits the Earth at about 250 miles. It goes around the Earth once every
90 minutes, roughly. So the astronauts that you see quite a lot of sunrises and
sunsets every day, they can't obviously follow the time zone that they're
passing over because they'd never know what time it was. So they have to pick a
time zone and stick to it. So the International Space Station, they use
essentially Greenwich Mean Time, UTC, as we call it. So picking a time zone for
your mission to run by is not an unusual thing. The difference with this one is
that you have to look at how your clocks run differently on the Moon because
you're in a different gravitational environment to what you are on the Earth. So
that makes your clocks run at a different speed, very, very slight. I was going
to say that time on the Moon does move at a marginally different speed, doesn't
it? Yeah, clocks run faster on the Moon by about 56 microseconds per Earth day
than they do on the Earth. Now, this is not a new phenomenon. We know this
happens. It happens with satellites in Earth orbit as well. We have to correct
for this with GPS satellites as well. The way you measure your position with GPS
relies on you measuring the time delay between signals coming from different
satellites. You measure that time delay, you multiply it by the speed of light,
300,000 kilometres per second, and you get the distance measurements. So small
timing errors there can result in very, very big position errors on the ground.
So it's really critical to get this right. So that's one problem. The other
problem, of course, you have is that the lunar day isn't 24 hours like it is on
the Earth. One day, so the time it takes from sunrise through to the next
sunrise, is actually 29 and a half Earth days. So you essentially have two weeks
of daylight followed by two weeks of night time. So any time zone that you pick,
any time standard you pick, has to be practical for astronauts that are going to
be potentially spending months, if not years, on the Moon at a time. Computers
don't care if the sun is out, but people definitely do. And as you hinted, as
space travel becomes more frequent, this becomes more pressing, you would say.
Absolutely. So if the people looking at this problem are thinking further ahead
as well, it's not just about how we set a time standard for the Moon, but it's
about how we set one for Mars, how we set one for going to the outer planets as
well. So the future of our exploration of the solar system. OK. Thank you very
much indeed, Dr Megan Argo of the University of Central Lancashire. Time for our
closing headlines. Rishi Sunak has said that the Democratic Unionists should be
given the time and space to consider, his deal with the EU aimed at making it
easier to trade between Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK. Conservative
MPs from the European Research Group say their lawyers could take up to two
weeks to go through the deal with an extremely fine tooth comb. And that's the
World Tonight. This is Julian Warricker for now. From me and everyone on the
programme, have a very good Tuesday night. The studio engineers were Sharmini
Ashton-Griffiths and Jack Grazemark. Tonight's editor was Jack Hunter. While we
carry on the lunar theme here on Radio 4, as Toby Jones continues our reading of
Marco Valdo by Italo Calvino in a moment. Tonight Marco Valdo's efforts to teach
his children about the night sky are thwarted by a large neon sign. That's all
coming up after news of an important kick. Six Music. The year is 1978. Kate
Bush releases her seminal debut album. The Kick Inside. And on the record's 45th
anniversary, we're celebrating the icon that is Kate Bush. Six Music's deep dive
into The Kick Inside. You can find archive interviews and exclusive
performances, as well as playlists and programmes featuring artists she's
inspired. She was in her own world that she had created herself. Way, way ahead
of their time. For all this and more, open BBC Sounds, click the music tab and
scroll to find Kate Bush's Artist Icons collection. On our Radio 4, another tale
from Italo Calvino's Marco Valdo. Dramatised and narrated by Toby Jones and
starring Mackenzie Crook. Leaning from the window of the cramped attic where
they lived, Marco Valdo and his six children stared out into the hot summer
night. Fiordaligi, Marco Valdo's 15-year-old son, was entranced. He had glimpsed
a beautiful young girl in the window of the equivalent attic, directly opposite.
And in the dim light of that distant room, the girl appeared to be the same
colour as the moon itself. And Fiordaligi, a melancholy soul, smiled as she
seemed to return his gaze. Come to me, my darling. I will wait for you always.
Fiordaligi's view of the moon girl was partly obscured by the curl of an
enormous letter G, sculpted in neon. But he could just about see her mouth
broadening to return his smile when suddenly... Gnac! The giant neon letters,
G-N-A-C, Gnac, flashed back on, extinguishing the girl. Every 20 seconds, the
natural darkness of night exploded into 20 seconds of blinding red neon. Gnac!
For 20 seconds, Marco Valdo could see the blue sky streaked with black clouds,
the gilded sickle of the waxing moon outlined by its impalpable halo. Do you
see, Michelino? That there is the Milky Way. Where, Papa? You see the moon? Yes.
Well, to the left of the moon, where it seems to... Gnac! Oh! Everything had to
be noticed in great haste, and every time Marco Valdo dwelt on a particular
cosmic detail, his children lost sense of the bigger picture until... Gnac! The
Gnac was a four-letter section of a much larger neon sign hanging from the roof
of the building opposite, the Pierre Barnardi building. The whole sign was an
advertisement for something called SPAC cognac. When it was illuminated, Marco
Valdo and his children were blinded to anything else. The moon suddenly faded,
the sky flattened, and the girl in the attic opposite vanished. Return to me, my
heavenly angel, goddess of the night. I hope I freeze, then bow my face to Earth
again. Giordaligi peered desperately into the blackness. Next to him, Marco
Valdo's daughter, Isolina, was lost in a dream of escape. She was getting older
now, and the moonlight made her heart soar, made her yearn for an intangible
future, and the music from a radio somewhere far below them seemed to serenade
her alone with its promise of new horizons, romance, and... Gnac! Oh! Watch out!
You're dead! No, I'm the lone angel! Patricia! Boys, stop! Quiet! Every time the
advert came back on, the two younger boys forgot how late it was and crashed
around the tiny attic the family called home. Wait! Until the Gnac went off
again and the moon returned. Look up there, boys. You can see it. Yes, wait.
Wait just a second. There! That is the Great Bear. And in the midst of these
swirling, shifting emotions stood Marco Valdo himself, motionless, trying to
teach his children, pointing out the positions of the various celestial bodies.
One, two, three, four, and there the tail, and just there... Where? Just there,
you see? That is the Little Bear. Oh. And that is the Pole Star, that means
north. Gnac! Papa, what does that one mean? Which one? That one there. That one
just means sea, but that doesn't have anything to do with the stars, that's just
the last letter of the word cognac. Cognac? The stars mark the four cardinal
points of the cosmos. North, south, east, and west. And when the moon's hump is
to the west, it's waxing. But when the hump is to the east, the moon is waning.
Is cognac waning, Papa? Of course it is. Like the hump of the sea is to the
east. No, no, no, the waxing and waning have nothing to do with that, that's
just a sign for cognac. Who put it there? It doesn't matter. The SPAC company
hung it up there to advertise their... So which company put up the moon there?
The moon wasn't put up by anyone. The moon is... it's a... it's a satellite, and
it's always there. So if it's always there, why does it keep changing its hump?
Gnac! That's the quarters, we can only see a part of the moon. But you can only
see a part of the cognac too. Well, yes, but that's just because the roof on the
Pierre Bernardi building is slightly higher than us. Higher than the moon? No...
And so it went on. Every time the gnac came back on, Marcovaldo's celestial
constellations got mixed up with terrestrial commerce, and Isolina's frustrated
sigh of longing became a happy hum of mambo. Michelino and Petruchio fought
their imaginary battles, strafing the neon sign, and poor, thwarted Fiordiligi,
who had eventually summoned the courage to blow a kiss to the moon girl
opposite, only to see her vanish in that cold, dazzling arc, awaited her
response, postponed for another 20 seconds, until the gnac switched off again.
Look, Papa, look! Did you see how I shot the lights out with my rifle? What? I
killed the lights! Okay, I think it's time for bed. But then... Gnac! Hmm. If
only you had killed the lights, then I could show you Leo the Lion... What? And
the plough, the twins... Yes, Papa, I want to see Leo the Lion! Me too, me too!
We'll look for it tomorrow night. But reaching into his pocket, Michelino
located the ready supply of gravel, which he always carried in reserve. He took
out his slingshot, and before anyone could say anything, he fired a volley of
pebbles with all his strength at the gnac. Wait, no! What? They listened out, as
the pebbles fell in an invisible shower across the roof opposite, bouncing and
rolling downwards, rattling the tin of the drainpipes, and finally, the street
lamps far below. Hide! Come on, Doc! It's Alina! What? Alina, come on, we're
going to win! Everyone froze beneath the window, holding their breath,
counting... Shhh, shhh, shhh, Papa, look! 21, 22... Gnac is gone! And they
counted again, pausing between numbers, just in case they'd gone too fast the
first time. But nothing happened. The gnac didn't come on again. The night
stayed dark, and the outline of the neon letters hung against their scaffolding,
like vine around a pergola. Gnac is dead! I killed the lights, Papa! Look! It
was true. But now, darkness, like a barrier, shut out the world below, and the
family could see the drama of space unfold. The constellations seemed to have
expanded, and the firmament was turning in every direction, a sphere that
contained everything without boundary. Papa? But Marco Valdo was transfixed by
the moon. It looked different, no longer a crescent. It now revealed itself as
an opaque sphere, its outline illuminated by the oblique rays of a sun the Earth
had lost. The whole family stayed at the attic window, the younger boys
frightened by the measureless consequences of their act, Isolina born away in
ecstasy, and Fiordiligi re-locking his gaze with the moon girl opposite. There
you are again, oh slimy gnac mistress. And at last, he could see that she
returned his smile. My love. Come on, come on. Marco Valdo recovered himself.
No, it's late. Papa, wait, wait. Come on, come away from the window now. And now
I shall switch off the moon. Just... For the rest of that night, and through the
following day, the neon letters spelling Gnac on the roof opposite stayed off,
broken, so that the neon spelt only Spac Co. And from the family's attic window,
the view of the firmament remained clear. Fiordiligi was free to blow kisses at
his moon girl opposite, and using their own sign language, they resolved to
meet. But then, on the morning of the second day, two electricians in overalls
appeared on the roof opposite. What are they doing, Papa? Hmm, the Gnac will be
back tonight. Mark my words, everyone. It'll be fixed again in no time. Yes, who
is it? I'm from Tomowac. Who? Tomowac. Can I have a word? The suited gentleman
smiled brightly at Marco Valdo and his various children. Good morning. I do beg
your pardon, sir, but I'd like to have a look at your window, if you don't mind.
Our window? Yes. My name is Godifredo. I work as a neon advertising agent for
Tomowac. Is that the window there? What? I'd like to see the view. It's through
there. Marco Valdo stared at his children. Ah, yes, I see. Good, good. Oh, God,
please, no. Sorry, sir. It was a mistake. We're so sorry. Please, please forgive
us. I don't earn much. Well, you probably have children yourself, so you know
how it is. Well, my boys like to shoot at the sparrows with pebbles. And well,
look, I really don't know how it happened, but the SPAC sign just went out. It
just did. Kaput. Kaput? Kaput? I see. But I punish them all the same. Oh, yes.
Don't you worry about that, signore. I certainly punish them, and you can be
sure that it will never happen again. I see. Never again. You have my word.
Well, actually... In fact, he's right here now. Michelino? Please, signore, I'm
very sorry for the... Thank you, but really I should tell you that I'm not from
SPAC. I represent Tomowac. Tomowac Cognac. Not SPAC? No, Tomowac sent me down
here to look at that roof. Tomowac? That's right. But please do go on. I'm
interested to hear about these pebbles. And so it was that just 30 minutes
later, Marco Valdo sealed a special deal with Tomowac Cognac, arch-rivals of
SPAC Cognac. The deal required that Marco Valdo's two younger sons, Michelino
and Petruchio, should regularly empty their slingshots at the SPAC sign every
time the light came back on. And my suspicion is that that will be the straw
that breaks the camel's back. Smiled signore Godifredo. And he was right. Early
on the brink of bankruptcy, because of its large advertising outlay, SPAC Cognac
took the constant and mysterious damage to their beautiful neon sign as a bad
omen. The sign, that sometimes read COGAC and sometimes CONAC or CONC, gave a
bad impression to the firm's many creditors. The suspicion of financial
difficulties led the advertising firm to refuse any further repairs until all
arrears were paid. And so the sign stayed switched off. Until eventually SPAC
went out of business. Look, look, it's another full moon. As the summer came to
an end, the electricians returned to work on the roof of the Pierre Bernardi
building opposite, and then one night, in golden letters, twice the size of SPAC
Cognac, letters appeared so bright they seemed to burn a giant hole in the night
sky, a hole that spelt the words TOMOWAC COGNAC. No more moon, no more firmament
or sky or night, just TOMOWAC. One, two, TOMOWAC. Blinking on and off every two
seconds. And however long Fyodor Ligy stared out across the void into the attic
window opposite, it was hopeless. The moon girl had gone, vanished, behind an
enormous, immutable neon W.