TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 help look after someone else's children in your family. 03700 100 444. BBC News
at 11 o'clock. The European Council on Refugees has said new government
legislation aimed at stopping migrants crossing the Channel in small boats could
be unlawful. It's expected the illegal migration bill will prevent people
arriving illegally from claiming asylum or returning to the UK in future. The
Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, has acknowledged the bill pushes the
boundaries of international law. Jean-Paul Mouleau is a councillor for the Eau
de France region which includes Calais. He says the UK and France still need to
work more closely together. We need coordination, action and ambition. We need a
new treaty, not just a new regulation in the UK or a new regulation in France.
We need to work together. And that's been the failure, especially over the last
24 months. Because whatever is decided on one side has got an implication on the
other side. The trial of a man accused of murdering a nine-year-old girl in
Liverpool has begun at Manchester Crown Court. Jurors have been told that Thomas
Cashman, who's 34, was lying in wait for another man before he shot Olivia
Pratt-Corbell at her home in August last year. He denies all the charges he
faces. The former Health Secretary Matt Hancock has denied supporting plans to
put pressure on a Conservative MP if he voted against Covid restrictions in
England. Leaked messages suggest Mr Hancock backed the idea of blocking funding
for a new disability centre to ensure the support of the very North MP James
Daly. The GMB union says it's hoping that a meeting with the Health Secretary
today will lead to a fair pay award for NHS workers. The union is one of several
beginning three days of talks with ministers with strikes by health workers put
on hold while discussions take place. There's expected to be a high demand when
tickets for this year's Eurovision Song Contest go on sale in an hour's time.
Fans can try to secure entry to nine public shows being held as part of the
event in Liverpool in May. BBC News. Well, as excitement builds ahead of this
year's Eurovision, in half an hour here on Radio 4 we'll have a new series in
which we'll be asking where the musicians of tomorrow will come from as free
access to musical tuition becomes increasingly rare for school children. That's
Rethinking Music at half past eleven. First on Radio 4, here's the writer and
journalist Helen Lewis, back with a new series of encounters with people
thinking about the future and how we might need to do things differently in The
Spark. Hello. If there was ever a time when we needed to hear from people who
were thinking about the world afresh, it's probably right now. So that's what
we're here for. Welcome to The Spark. In 1994, the newly graduated psychology
student Rory O'Connor had a sliding doors moment when his professor at Queen's
University in Belfast asked if he would consider doing a PhD on suicide. It has
been his academic focus ever since, and this subject, suicide and how to prevent
it, is the theme of today's edition. Today, Rory O'Connor is a professor in
health psychology at the University of Glasgow. Sadly, that same professor who
changed O'Connor's life later took his own after a long struggle with poor
mental health. In O'Connor's book, When It Is Darkest, he writes about the
effect of that suicide and others on him, as well as offering some hope that by
changing our approach we can reduce the number of people who see no other escape
from their problems. Rory, welcome to The Spark. Thank you. Delighted to be
here. You write in the book about the many myths that we have about suicide.
What are they and why are they so persistent? So maybe the one to start with is
the myth that asking somebody about suicide will plant the idea in their head.
There's absolutely no evidence for that. And indeed there's evidence to the
contrary. So there's definitely evidence that if you ask somebody about suicide,
that could be the start of a life-saving conversation. Now of course, suicide
and suicide prevention is more than just asking somebody the question, are they
suicidal, how are they doing? But it's a start and it's a really, really
important start. I thought there's one of the things I took most strongly from
the book was the idea that it feels so intrusive, I guess, to ask that question
or I don't know, some people might take it as pejorative or offensive, but that
you should, if you see someone who is really struggling, say, even if you put it
like that, presumably, right, are you really struggling more than I'm seeing?
How are you doing? Absolutely. So my sort of experience draws on asking that
question many times myself over my career, as well as knowing others who've
asked that question. And I would say almost every single case that I know of,
the fact that somebody reached out was so empowering because often the person
who's suicidal feels that they're worthless. They feel that nobody would care if
they were dead or actually nobody would even know whether they'd gone. And so
what's really, really striking is that asking that question sort of opens up not
only this conversation, but the sense of validation, this sense of I am worthy
of somebody asking that question. And in the book, I talk about people I've met
and people I've heard about who've asked that question. And then the recipient,
the person who was struggling, is just so relieved and it helps smash the
stigma. It helps smash some of the shame often the person who's suicidal feels.
My God, it's just awful. Nobody else cares about me, but somebody has reached
out. That sense of human connection can save a life. There's one person who's
walking through a park, isn't there, and an acquaintance stops and sees him and
goes back and says, I'm really sorry, but are you doing OK? And that was enough,
wasn't it, that they just felt in that moment, oh, people see that I'm in pain.
I'm a real person. I exist. Absolutely. And what that speaks to is this wider
point of when we think about the mind of somebody who's suicidal, suicidal
thoughts are never permanent. They're temporary. And we know they come in waves.
So we always often talk about suicidality as the suicidal thoughts wax and wane.
And so what you're trying to do then is if somebody is acutely suicidal, even
small acts of kindness, small acts of reaching out, small acts of interrupting
those thoughts could be life saving. Take me through a few more of the myths.
The overwhelming majority of people who say are treated for depression will
never become suicidal and will certainly never die by suicide. The estimate is
about 4% of people who are treated for depression end their life. So the work
we've been trying to do is understand what is it about that 4% who are more
likely to die by suicide? The myth is that, say, somebody is in a depressed
state and then they seem to have recovered. And it's that unexpected improvement
in mood that sadly too many people, loved ones, health professionals have been
falsely reassured because it seemed as if the person was OK in the days and
weeks before they died. That's a myth because what we think happens is that
somebody who's in an acute suicidal state or is depressed, well, when they're
depressed, maybe they don't have the motivation or the capacity to plan and
carry out the suicidal act. But the concern is if in the depths of a depressive
episode, the person resolves that actually the... And the fear is that if you
make that decision, well, actually your mood might lift because you find a
solution to your problems. But the concern is as you exit that depressive
episode, as your mood elevates, well, sadly then you have the capacity both
cognitively and also sort of emotionally to plan and carry out the act. So my
message is if there's an unexplained improvement in mood, please check in with
that person. Because of course it could be that their psychotherapy or their
crisis has averted or medication is working. But the concern is if there's this
unexplained improvement, that's when I'd really, really be concerned. And you
talk as well about this idea and myth again about suicide being something that's
selfish. I struggle with this in one level because I can understand why many
people from the outside view it as a selfish act. But if you get inside the mind
of somebody who's suicidal, a person who's suicidal often feels that they're a
burden on those around them. They feel that they're actually doing those around
them a favour by ending their life. And also they're overwhelmed by mental pain
that they can't see the impact in that moment of crisis that it could have on
those left behind. So the reason I think it's really important not to consider
it a selfish act is just imagine that we often talk about the tunnel vision of
the mind of somebody who's suicidal. They can't see the alternatives. They can't
see the longer term impact. And also they're so exhausted that actually they
just can't continue for so many people. And that's why it's so important that we
have a sense of compassion, trying to understand the pain of suicidality. So
it's so overwhelming that the desire to live is not strong enough and the desire
to die outweighs his desire to live in that sense. Which I suppose also makes
sense of one of your other findings, which is that perfectionism as a
personality trait is correlated with higher suicidality, right? The idea that
people feel I've failed, I won't ever be forgiven, it's ruined, this is my way
out. Absolutely. And so we've done over many years now, done a lot of research
on the relationship between a particular type of perfectionism and suicide risk.
And so the research shows that perfectionism, which was called socially
prescribed perfectionism or social perfectionism, in those who are that's
elevated, and I speak as somebody who's high levels of social perfectionism, and
maybe you have as well Helen. I recognise myself in those bits in the book. You
know, the feeling that if you screw up even slightly, you're ruined, it's
terrible, everything is... I can imagine how those, in the thoughts of somebody
who's incredibly depressed, becomes a very unhealthy pattern of thinking. Yeah,
it's a cyclical and it escalates and escalates. So that social perfectionism in
the book I describe as having thin psychological skin and this idea that if
you're really uber sensitive to, we describe it as these social signals of
failure. So if you have something in your environment, it could be a work
context or it could be a relationship context, whatever, basically every day is
an opportunity for you to think you've failed. And it's that psychological thin
skin where the bows and arrows of life are hitting us all. And for somebody who
is low on social perfectionism, they're less likely to be affected. Those arrows
just bounce off them metaphorically. But for us, it's much more likely to impact
on our psychological health. And that's only one factor because the other key
message is that it's not caused by a single factor. It's this perfect storm of
factors, which is, yes, there's biological aspects, there are social aspects,
cultural aspects and clinical aspects. But to my mind, suicide is ultimately a
psychological phenomenon because an individual makes a decision to end their
life. Now, we can argue over the extent to which that's conscious or
unconscious, but ultimately an individual, when they perceive their past, their
present and they project themselves into the future, that that combination is
such that actually they think life is not worth living. And I think
understanding that complexity is so important. The suicide prevention strategies
need to embrace that complexity. We need to move beyond just viewing suicide as
this mental health concern. It's a public health concern. And it should be a
public health priority. What is the scale of the challenge? The challenge is
vast. So in the UK, suicide is a leading cause of death in men age 35 to 49. And
we've seen a lot of studies on suicide in the United Kingdom, and we've seen a
lot of studies in the UK, and we've seen a lot of studies in the UK, and the
research has shown that suicide in the UK is a leading cause of death. And it's
not just a mental health problem. In men age 35 to 49, suicide is a leading
cause of death amongst women. I think the statistic is between the age of 25 and
35. So these are major public health concerns. Globally, 703,000 people die by
suicide each year. Each day in the UK, 15 people lose their struggle to live.
And at least 20 times that number will have attempted suicide. If we look at
then at the ripples of suicide, the ripples of suicide are vast. So it's been
estimated that for every person who dies by suicide, perhaps 135 people will
have known that person, potentially affected. So if we scale it up and do the
maths, that's 95 million people potentially affected. And the other thing we
know from the research is that the bereavement by suicide, of course those who
are nearest and dearest are absolutely devastated. But the ripples are
incredible and the impact is incredible. And I speak as somebody who is bereaved
by suicide and lost two important people in my life. And those both of those
experiences have changed me as a person. And I think we need to think about that
impact, that broader impact of bereavement by suicide as well as those who are
suicidal and those who are caring for somebody who is suicidal. What is your
spark? What is your big idea about how we address this problem differently? For
too long, we've been frightened to talk about suicide. Stigma leads to fewer
people seeking help. So we need to change the conversations around suicide. I
remember growing up and I was frightened of the whole idea of mental health,
nevermind suicide. And one of the sort of things I've tried to do over the last
20 years in particular is reframe suicide as not simply this byproduct of mental
illness, but often, often just the most devastating outcome of a really awful
existence for some people. So early life trauma, we know is associated with
suicide risk. Disadvantage is associated with suicide risk. But the broader
point is, is that we should see suicide first and foremost as a behaviour. It's
something that somebody does, they engage in. And if you start to see it as a
behaviour, well as a psychologist, that opens up this whole plethora of things
we can do, a way of understanding it. The culmination of many years of research
led me to develop a new psychological model of suicide called the Integrated
Motivational Volitional Model. Before I asked Professor Rory O'Connor to set out
his model and how it improves our understanding of suicide and how to prevent
it, I wanted to ask him about his own experiences. As well as the death of his
professor, O'Connor lost another friend and colleague who took her own life in
2008. Despite his understanding of the theoretical aspects of the subject, it
must still have been an emotional shock. Yeah, when Clare died, Clare was a
really close friend of mine and we worked together, we'd studied together and we
were really great friends. And we had talked about her mental health and her
challenges. And she was living in Paris at the time when she died and I have
loads of regrets like we all have when we lose somebody. So for example, I had a
young family at the time and I was meant to go and visit in Paris and we didn't
get to visit because of the young family. So we kept in regular contact and I
suppose it struck me when I got the call from Clare's husband, it's still
devastating to recount that experience of when they've said Clare's gone and I
just couldn't make sense at that time of what he meant by she's gone. I thought
she's gone back to the UK because she was in Paris. Even though we had talked
about mental health stuff in the past, I just didn't sadly see it coming. And so
that personal impact was devastating. But of course then, because literally
every day since 1994, in some shape or form I've been thinking or doing stuff on
suicide. And I suppose professionally it really had a huge impact on my own
professional identity. And I didn't know initially in those days and weeks, I
flew to Paris to be with Dave, Clare's husband, when Clare died. And in those
days and weeks after that, I didn't know if I'd be able to continue working in
the field of suicide research and suicide prevention. And I used to have dreams
and nightmares with Clare. But part of what helped me was that over time, when
Clare would appear in my dreams, it was to tell me that she was okay. And so I
think that in itself helped me then make the decision that I would continue
because I knew that, well, I hope I'm right in thinking that's what Clare would
have wanted. And I know Clare's husband wants that as well. So for me, that
impact was and remains devastating. But I suppose what I've always been
incredibly passionate about, suicide and suicide prevention and mental health
ever since being a young kid. But it really highlighted to me how important it
is that we do whatever we can to try and save lives. But it also highlighted the
biggest challenge is that although on a national level, we've made some progress
in terms of national strategies to prevent suicide, but it brought home to me
Clare's death in particular, the challenge of preventing suicide on an
individual level. You mentioned there your regret, and I've known several people
who've been bereaved by suicide who have had exactly that. Is there something I
could have said? Is there something I could have done? And that's the thing I
think that often haunts people that they believe that if they'd just been a
magic word or a little key that they turned, things would have been different.
How do you deal with those feelings afterwards? I think part of it is accepting
that no one individual, none of us can be held responsible for the actions of
somebody else. And I think that's a really important message. But also to
recognise that the experience of grief is devastating. It's unique, it's
different for everybody. There's common themes, but those feelings of regret,
those feelings often of anger, of shame, that they're common to so many people
who are bereaved by suicide. And so although when you think about moving
forward, you are changed as an individual, and I'm speaking to somebody who's
obviously lost two friends and a colleague, but it gives me some insight to
losing a really close family member. And so family members I've spoken to and
others who've been bereaved talk about you move forward. You're just trying to
move forward each day. And then those days become weeks and those weeks become
months. And although you'll never be the person you were, this new existence, I
don't know if bearable is the right way, but it's just a different existence. I
work closely with a number of charities, suicide prevention charities, and one
in particular we're working with at the minute is James's Place, which is this
charity for men who are struggling with suicidal thoughts. And that was set up
by a family and that family were bereaved, lost their son to suicide. And what
Clare, the mother, talks about is just trying to translate that devastation into
some way of helping others. How I've gone through it now is recognising that,
yes, it's absolutely devastating as all, but I can't change the past. And the
feelings you experience are different over time. And that there are days which
it just creeps up on you. And again, in the book, I talk a lot about people's
experiences of bereavement and recognising that bereavement is unique to all of
us. The only predictable bit about the grief or the bereavement is its
unpredictability. And I suppose one other thing I would just say is if you are,
if you know somebody who's bereaved by suicide, like sadly still people cross
the road still to this day and that crossing the road... To avoid them. To avoid
them, yeah. It's not because they don't want to talk to the person, but often
they don't know what to say to the person who's lost somebody to suicide. And I
suppose my message is as long as you convey a sense of compassion and sort of
validation, just the understanding that the must be so difficult for you, you're
not going to do harm. So please reach out because the person's already often
feeling so isolated. You're listening to The Spark with me, Helen Lewis. Next I
asked my guest, the psychologist Rory O'Connor, to unpack the innovative
approach he has developed to understanding why some people end up taking their
own life. It is called the integrated motivational volitional model because it
separates out two phases. In the first, suicidal motives and intentions develop.
It's only in the second or volitional phase that for some people, those thoughts
go on to become actions. O'Connor argues that understanding this distinction
provides a framework for trying to prevent suicide more effectively. For too
long in the field, we often talked about suicidality. And suicidality is this
combination of thoughts and acts, suicidal acts. Because lots of people have
intentions and don't translate those intentions into acts. And so the volitional
phase, the second half of it is trying to understand who is more likely to act
on their thoughts. The volitional factors are the factors which increase the
likelihood that somebody crosses a precipice from suicidal thoughts to suicidal
acts. And what would those be? So first of all, just to do it on the
motivational phase. So the motivational phase, so I would argue, is that people
are more likely to become suicidal if they feel defeated and or humiliated from
which they cannot escape. And it's that sense of entrapment is like part of the
common final pathway to the emergence of suicidal thoughts. So that sense of
entrapment, that mental pain, which is often yet driven by defeat and or
humiliation can also be driven by loss, rejection, by shame. And these are
really powerful emotions. And what happens in the emergence of suicidal thoughts
is that just for some people, those thoughts become so unbearable and that sense
of entrapment becomes so overwhelming that somebody need a way out. But then
according to my model, there are at least eight factors which are important in
understanding who is more likely to act on their thoughts. Now, our best
estimates are about 30% of people who have thoughts of suicide cross a precipice
from suicidal thoughts to mostly suicide attempts. And sadly, a few will also,
of course, five and a half thousand people each year in the UK die by suicide.
So those volitional phase factors are different. They are things like having
access to the means of suicide. If I'm thinking about suicide and I've a method
of suicide in my mind and I've access to that method, the environmental
constraint is removed and I'm more likely to act on that thought. So that's
where the state and policymaking has a role in suicide prevention, right? So the
fact that there are certain drugs that you can only buy in certain amounts so
people can't keep large amounts in their homes, that is a policy change that has
been really helpful. Yeah, the best evidence for preventing suicide are large
public health interventions about keeping areas of concern safe, making sure
other methods which could be fatal or highly lethal that we try and restrict
access to those. And that's also where safety planning comes in and safety
planning is on an individual level is trying to work with somebody in a clinical
or in just any individual context in which if somebody is having thoughts of
suicide, you try and get them to think in advance not only what their warning
signs are and who they could contact in a crisis, but you also try to get them
to make their environment safe. Other volitional factors include impulsivity. If
you're impulsive, you're more likely to act on your thoughts. Another one is
exposure to suicide. If we know somebody who's died by suicide, your risk of
acting on your thoughts is elevated. I'm at increased risk of being twice
bereaved by suicide. But it's important to put that in context. That's a
statistical increase. The overwhelming majority of people who are bereaved by
suicide will never become suicidal and will never act on their thoughts. And
that's a very key point, isn't it? Because if you are someone who has perhaps
lost a partner to suicide and you're very worried about your children, yes,
there is an increased risk to them, but it's an increase from a very, very small
risk to a very small risk. Absolutely. But it's important that we recognise it
so that somebody does get the support if they need it. And it also comes back to
this idea that there's no single factor that leads to suicide. But the other
volitional phase factors are things like we talk about what's known as having
the capability for suicide. And that's thought to be two factors together. One
is fearlessness about dying. So this idea that you have to overcome the life
instinct. And we know that, again, comes in waves of intensity. That capability
is fearlessness plus often having the physical pain tolerance to withstand the
physical pain, which is often required for some suicidal acts. And again, we've
been doing some work on this experimentally in our lab in Glasgow, trying to
assess physical pain tolerance in individuals with different suicidal histories.
The other two worth highlighting are mental imagery. So again, this idea if
you're having thoughts of suicide and you're picturing yourself dying or dead,
that's increased risk. You're more likely to cross a precipice because what we
think is going on is partly a rehearsal and partly maybe a habituation to the
idea. And that sort of mental rehearsal perhaps makes you less fearful about
dying. So again, the reason for highlighting that is if you're a clinician, if
you're a GP, say, or a family member and somebody is talking about suicide, try
and get some sense of these factors. And then the very last one I'll mention,
Helen, is past behaviour. Single best predictor of future behaviour is whether
you've engaged in any form of self-injurious behaviour in the past. So any form
of self-injury which without intervention could have ended in death or serious
harm. Most people will recover, but again, you're still trying to think about if
in a later stage somebody is talking about suicide, having thoughts of suicide,
it's just another warning sign that we need to take a bit of extra care here.
How much is there to be done practically now? And how much has already the kind
of things you're talking about been integrated into the National Health Service
here in Britain? Not enough has been done. If I reflect on the last 20 years, we
have made progress in accessibility of mental health services, but the waiting
lists are still vast, especially for child and adolescent mental health
services. An adolescent could be waiting still over 12 months to get potentially
life-saving treatment. So although yes, we have increased access, the levelling
up between physical and mental health, I think we've made some progress, but
we've a long way to go. The Westminster government just released the new big
conditions approach and mental ill health is one of the conditions, but I'm
concerned that it's not going to get the attention it should have got because
prior to that there was meant to be the 10 year mental health strategy for
England. Now I live in Scotland and we've just at the start of our 10 year
suicide prevention strategy and the key thing which I'm impressed with in
Scotland is it's cross-governmental. Suicide prevention is more than mental
health. Meaning that it takes in social care, it takes in policing. Education,
the whole spectrum because suicide prevention, you need to look across the
departments. So I think there's real innovation going on in Scotland and indeed
one of the things Scotland has done for the first time is they've embedded my
model as a new way of trying to understand suicide and so that every department.
So if you're in education or your clinical services, are they contributing to
somebody feeling defeated and trapped or are they leading to empowerment, sense
of compassion and so what we've been trying to do over the next 10 years is have
this clearly compassionate person-centred response, but incorporate early
intervention and prevention as well as the crisis services. It's absolutely
vital we look across the spectrum. So I'm really hoping that we have a whole of
the UK approach which is cross-government, which gets the funding that it
requires, never mind the personal and social tragedy of suicide. From
government's point of view, every suicide we think costs the economy about £1.7
million. So if we invest, not only are we preventing heartache and devastation,
but economically it makes sense. There may be people listening to this programme
who are worried about someone that they know. What would be your advice to them?
What is something that they can do? Please reach out and even if you're scared,
frightened, that's totally understandable. In the book I try and provide tips on
asking these difficult questions, but please reach out and if you are concerned,
there's no face of somebody who's suicidal, so this idea that the person who's
suicidal will have their head in their hands, that just doesn't, I mean that is
the case for some cases, but in lots of cases it's not. If you notice changes in
behaviour, more withdrawn, people talking about feeling trapped or hopeless or
making changes that it looks as if they're trying to sort out their life if they
weren't there. If they have been bereaved or experienced a trauma or a loss or
rejection or shame, check in with them. Asking that question about are you okay
and maybe asking it twice because when we're asked that question once, we'll
always just go yeah I'm fine. Maybe ask it again because anything like that
promotes a sense of connection and hopefully prevents somebody who is suicidal
perhaps, hidden in the shame of suicide, that suicidal crisis escalating and
potentially crossing the precipice from thoughts to acts of suicide. Well
Professor Rory O'Connor, thank you for talking to me. The book is When It Is
Darkest and I find it really moving and meaningful and thank you for coming on
The Spark. Thank you very much. In our next edition of The Spark, the science
writer Stuart Ritchie explains how fraud, bias, negligence and hype plague
scientific research and what can be done about that. The Spark is presented by
Helen Lewis and the producer is Phil Tinline. If you're suffering distress or
despair and need support, including urgent support, a list of organisations that
can help is available at bbc.co.uk forward slash action line or you can call for
free to hear recorded information on 0800 066 066. Now it's Tuesday which means
it's call you and yours just after midday. Here's Winifred Robinson with details
of the programme and how to get in touch. We want to talk about childcare today.
We're asking how is childcare working for you? Ring 03700 100444. Parents in the
UK are paying more for their childcare than people in many other countries, on
average 29% of what they bring home. The cost of it is keeping women out of the
workplace. Childcare providers have written to the Prime Minister this week
asking him to make it a priority in the budget. So how is childcare working for
you? Please call us. If you're working parents or if you work in childcare or if
you look after children for someone in your family, ring 03700 100444. Thanks
Winifred. The number again 03700 100444. Now if you're a Eurovision fan, you may
be braced to try and snap up tickets when they go on sale in half an hour's
time. Right now here on Radio 4 it's time for Rethinking Music. In the first of
a three-part series Soweto Kinch explores the state of music education in the
UK, looking at changes in recent decades and the impact they could have on the
next generation of musicians. Music is something we do really well in Britain.
So we are the second biggest exporter of music on the planet. We are an absolute
musical superpower. It's disappearing from some of our schools and there are
real inequalities in access. If I didn't have that, I wouldn't be here. Like
it's that simple. In this series, I'm going to look into what's happened and
why, how much it matters and what can be done about it. We have to constantly be
readdressing what are our aims and priorities when we are putting music and
education together. I'm Soweto Kinch, a musician, historian and composer. Born
in London, I grew up and live in Birmingham. I was lucky to live in Handsworth,
an area that's just rich with music. On the same street as me, around the
corner, was the guitarist Basil Gabberdon from Steel Pulse, a legendary reggae
group from Handsworth. Whilst I didn't have after-school clubs, I'd say after
school, the music education continued apace everywhere, you know, the idea that
music, it doesn't just exist in one space, I think is quite crucial to a West
Indian background too, or even African music conception, that music exists in
church, exists at home, exists while you're playing games, and to understand
that we don't compartmentalise music in quite the same way was quite valuable to
me. I was nurtured by my community, but I did also have access to free
instrumental lessons and workshops growing up, the chance to try different
things out. All that stuff seems to be disappearing. I want to know, where will
tomorrow's musicians come from? Sheku Kanemason's a standout star of the
classical world in the past few years. But what does it take to raise one of
those? Kadiatu Kanemason, his mother, a music education advocate and writer,
told me about her own experiences of music growing up. What's changed within one
generation, and especially within the last 10 years? Well, for me, I grew up in
the days where music was available in schools for free. So I was at a Welsh
comprehensive school. It was a very working class area. Most of the children
there were children of steelworking families. And we had a full orchestra in the
school. We had free one to one lessons. Music was just a natural part of our
education. You speak really eloquently as well about your husband's experience
with music growing up in London. I too was in an Ilia in a London educational
authority, and Benjamin Britten and Peter and the Wolf and all these sorts of
stuff, recorders, flutes were just sort of ubiquitous, right? Yes. And it didn't
matter who you were, you were expected to learn music. It was just a bit like
learning maths or English. It was just part of the natural way of things. Sure,
irrespective of rank or race, it's like everyone saw the benefits of doing it.
The political fortunes or wins around music education have changed wildly
throughout our lifetimes. What's been the impact of national policy on music
provision? I think it's been devastating. I mean, I can go from complete
personal experience. My older children went to a secondary school where it was
fantastic. It was absolutely focused on music and the creative arts. Then it
became a multi-academy trust in time for my youngest children, and it completely
changed. The music was stripped from the school. It hasn't completely gone, but
it's completely different. And suddenly there was no cello teacher, no violin
teacher. The orchestra was halved. And I think the years of COVID have added an
extra excuse. We don't need music anymore. We need to get back to basics. Music
makes a huge contribution to the economy. So pre-pandemic, it generated 5.8
billion pounds for the economy. It supported 200,000 jobs. Jamie Njoku-Goodwin
is the chief executive of UK Music, which brings together different parts of the
music industry to collaborate, champion and campaign for it. We still have a
world-beating music industry, for now. When you look at music tourism, that
generates billions and billions of pounds in excess of that 5.8 billion pounds.
It's a really key part of our economic infrastructure. It's important in terms
of soft power and our international reputation. Whether we're thinking of
Purcell and Tallis, if we're thinking of Elgar, Brittenfall, Williams, The
Beatles, Bowie, Adele, Sheeran, it's part of our heritage as a country. It's
something that really informs our national identity. And so I think even beyond
the economic, it's an incredibly key part of this country's identity. To what
extent is music education even necessary, though? I mean, how many of these
people, these agencies, these stakeholders, remember their music studies from
GCSE? How important is education at all in providing lanes for these sorts of
things to happen? So I think music education, in the broader sense, is
absolutely critical to the industry. And when I say that, I don't just mean the
people on the stage. There's the work of thousands of people behind the scenes,
who you might not see, but are creating that experience for you. So there's a
whole ecosystem of people around the big name on the ticket. And so I think
making sure there's a skills base to make sure that there are pathways of people
to be successful musicians themselves, but actually part of the industry more
broadly, is very important. There are two arms to music education. What happens
in schools and what's offered outside, through council-run music services, now
folded into music hubs. Over the past 15 years, music's been deprioritised in
classrooms, but not for everyone. The picture is complex across the UK. It
depends on which nation you're in, and which region, and what kind of school you
go to. And in one generation, access to free instrumental lessons through music
services has mostly been eroded. Because it wasn't quite as available for our
children as it had been for us, it meant that we had to pay for it, and it's
very expensive. I think my journey in music began even before I came to
Birmingham as a kid. I grew up in a really artistic household. I was lucky, as
part of the local educational authorities in both London and Birmingham, to have
access to instruments, free workshops where I could see a saxophone for the
first time, as I did in Handsworth, playing in church, playing at carnival,
emceeing and rapping with friends. And so it was great to then come together
with other music makers from different traditions here in the city. There are
lots of opportunities to jam and make music together that I think really honed
my skills. More honing happened for me once I joined Tomorrow's Warriors in my
late teens. Currently based on the South Bank in London, we'll hear more about
them later in the series. Alumni include Chebaka Hutchings, Moses Boyd and
Nubayah Garcia, Mercury-nominated saxophonist and composer. Nubayah, it's really
good to speak to you, it's been a while. Hi! I know, it has been a minute,
hasn't it? Nubayah grew up in Camden Town, North London, benefiting from the
music service there. She later taught for them too and is now a patron of the
Camden Music Trust, which raises funds for music activities for young people. I
got subsidised lessons, if not free at some points, and help with finding where
to get the better instruments and how to afford that, I've seen things
completely change from when I was a kid. So I had individual lessons twice a
week, one through school and one through Camden Music. And I'm talking about all
the instruments, so piano lessons, violin lessons, viola lessons and saxophone
lessons when I finally got there, which I think has changed now. When I was
teaching, it was a few more like small group lessons, which changes the way that
you absorb the information because you have four people in the lesson, three
people who learn at different rates in different ways. So I'm thankful, so
thankful for having an opportunity to have not one, but two private lessons a
week for a number of years. And the lack of that provision you say is probably
cuts? Yeah, it's cuts, it's cuts. Give them like a path to get there if that's
what they want, rather than it being like, oh yeah, well that's not for me
because it's not open to me. What kind of effect do you think that will have on
the music itself in the long term? You know, the kind of people that we teach,
that we see in universities, or the kind of people that release albums like
yours in ten years' time? You're going to have so many more hurdles. It's just
going to narrow the pool of the types of people that you see on stage. Local
authority music services grew out of an initiative during the Second World War.
They evolved into teams of peripatetic teachers who travelled between schools
providing free or low-cost instrumental lessons alongside the music offered as
part of the school's curriculum. Orchestras, wind bands, choirs and jazz
orchestras were formed for young musicians and it was in the 1960s that they
really flourished, producing a generation of world-class musicians. But there
were cutbacks in the 1980s and again after 2010 as council budgets shrank. We're
in another period of transition now, especially in England as part of the
government's new National Plan for Music, introduced last year. We'll be looking
at that later in this series. According to the Department of Education, that
plan recognises that more needs to be done to support the music hubs that
council provisions are now folded into. The next generation is what we're
looking towards and we have to keep nurturing that and I feel like, not that
it's stopped, but I think it is completely different. It's completely different
to the way I experienced my learning. If I didn't have that, I wouldn't be here.
Like it's that simple. The pool is already narrowing. The talent pipeline to the
music industry is under pressure. Conservatoires are one way into the classical
and jazz sector. I visited Royal Birmingham Conservatoire to talk to Head of
Pedagogy, Dr Adam Whittaker, who's been looking into the shifting landscape in
music education. In today's climate, there's a lot less funding available to
support many young musicians. For example, 30 years ago, every local authority
would have had a music service. Instrumental lessons probably would have been
free or available at very low cost. And although there is a legacy of that
today, it isn't offered to nearly the same extent as it was then. Parents
largely have to pay for lessons now, and how the wealth gap plays out in terms
of take-up of musical instruments is clear. Research by the Musicians' Union in
2018 found that children in low-income families are half as likely to learn an
instrument as those from a family with an income of £48,000 or more. Then
there's school provision, curriculum music. Education's a devolved issue, so the
picture varies widely across the UK. But there's something happening in
England's schools, a disengagement with music. Alongside Professor Martin
Fortley from Birmingham City University, Adam's been looking into the decline in
exam entries for music as a qualification in schools in England, especially
A-level. It's not the only stepping stone into a music career, of course, but
crunching the numbers they've come up with some alarming results. We've been
tracking the A-level situation for a few years now, looking at the trends and
unfortunately producing a series of graphs where there's a line that continues
to go down in many cases, which is quite concerning. And there's some
speculation that A-level courses might have disappeared altogether within the
next 10 years. Yeah, so we simply continued that line to look at where we would
end up if things continued at the same rate. And at that point we were looking
at reaching zero entries following that trend in 2033. Now, clearly the reality
of the situation is that there will be some schools who will always be able to
support A-level music in small numbers, but we were really concerned that these
young musicians are already in primary school. So it's not that this is a
distant problem. So if those young musicians who are now in primary school don't
have this kind of end goal available to them, and we're seeing closures in other
kinds of music courses as well, so this is not just an issue that's related to
A-level music, then we're really concerned about what's going to be available
for the young musician to choose. Jamie and Joku Goodwin, head of UK Music
again. It's in the interest not just of the music industry, but of the whole
country to have people going into this sector, to be supporting this sector. I
mean, there'll be people listening to this thinking, when's the last time that
somebody asked me for my A-level music results at a gig? Or, you know, how
important is it that you have a music education if you're genuinely musically
talented and committed to that? Surely you'll make it through anyway. Joku
Goodwin Yes, I think I wouldn't say A-level music is the be-all and end-all and
the only musical qualification you should have. There's actually a very vibrant
different range of different qualifications, some technical, vocational, BTECs.
I would say the decline in A-level music for me is symptomatic of a wider
disengagement with music education that I think we should be doing everything we
can to reverse. What's behind this decline in interest? It's not just about
money. There's another driver behind the deprioritisation of music in schools in
England at secondary level. There's been huge shifts in government policy which
have really impacted on music education. Deborah Annett is Chief Executive of
the Independent Society of Musicians, set up in 1882 to promote music and
support those working in the music sector. Deborah Annett And the thing which is
driving the disappearance of music from our schools, our state sector schools,
is something called the accountability measures that were introduced in 2010 and
2016. Back in 2010, Michael Gove introduced the EBAC, that's the English
Baccalaureate, and that is not to be confused with the International
Baccalaureate, and decided that it wanted to assess schools on the basis of some
very specific subjects, English, maths, science, languages and humanities. So
the arts were not part of that range of subjects which schools would be assessed
by. And what happened virtually immediately was that we saw arts subjects being
squeezed out – there simply wasn't sufficient time in the timetable for arts
subjects and music in particular if the school was going to do well in its EBAC
assessment. The Department for Education says the government is clear that all
pupils should be taught a broad and balanced curriculum and that the best
schools combine creative subjects with core academic subjects. They say that
EBAC was designed to support more pupils, including those who are disadvantaged,
to study what are called facilitating subjects at A-level, the subjects most
likely to secure them a place at a top university. But for Kadiatu Kanemason,
arts subjects should be central. Underneath it is a philosophy that they're
either not important or even completely unnecessary, and I think they've got it
completely backwards, because the reason that the school that my children go to
was such a good school was because music was at the centre, which meant the
academic results were very high, the children were happy, it was a nurturing
school and it worked. I mean, it suggests that you believe, and so do I, that
music is to a large extent a core subject. It's something which the aptitude,
the skills, the facility which you need to be able to excel in music are really
useful for things like maths, other core subjects as well, right? Yes, exactly.
And I think music has been backed into a corner where we're always having to
justify its inclusion, so we're always having to say, well, it's good for maths
and English, it's good for the other subjects, and I think it stands on its own
as a very valuable subject. We are forced to say it's very good for the
emotional well-being of children, which it is, but then at the same time make
out that it's not really an academic subject, and I think it is. I feel like my
education experiences gave me a very unique glimpse into some of the hierarchies
and hypocrisies of our music education system. As I mentioned, I went to a state
school in London and had access to rudimentary music making in a way that just
felt classless. We're just going to get into this music and everybody has a
chance to have a go. I also then went to a private school when we moved to
Birmingham and saw the benefits of music tuition and access to superior
instruments and a music store and a music room which venerated virtuosity and
venerated going on to do virtuosic music as a career. So I could see what I
wanted to be in a private school in the ways that wasn't necessarily there in a
parallel state school. So I saw a two-tier system in action. The independent
schools see art subjects and music as a key selling point. So if you look at a
brochure for a private school, they will often focus on arts provision. So
within the private sector, I think music and the arts will continue to flourish.
But I think in the state sector, there's a real, real risk that it's all just
going to disappear. And that has huge implications for the talent pipeline. It
also has implications in relation to diversity in the music sector. I think
people in the music industry want it to be diverse. They want to open it up.
They want it to be creative and relevant and inventive. And what will happen if
you strip out lots of people from being able to do it? It will become stale. It
will become elitist. And that's a huge tragedy. I think if you go to a private
school, they have all the music scholarships. They see music as very important.
But somehow, if you go to a state school, it's not something that you should do
if you want to get on. Which suggests there is really an ideology behind some of
these decisions that sort of arts and things which improve the human condition
are really just a preserve of elites. I think you've absolutely hit the nail on
the head. And I've been recently reading a lot from the era of the Jim Crow laws
back in the 1930s in the southern states of America. And it was the same
philosophy that there were schools and education that was right for a certain
group of people, but you have a very different educational curriculum for other
groups of people. And I think that's very much something that's widening in our
education system in the UK, where if you go to a private school, you have a
particular curriculum, but it's not for people in certain sectors. And I think
that's incredibly dangerous. With inequalities baked into the system, added to
that is the sense of a postcode lottery. A talent pipeline towards a career
where virtuosity on your instrument matters, whether in pop, classical or jazz,
is being diverted away from certain regions. Music education, whether curricular
or through outside services, is becoming unavailable for young people in certain
areas of the UK. Seeing the authority that my school's based in, I think there's
around nine or ten schools are secondary schools. And of those, I know there's
only one or two, myself included, that have GCSE music as a course running. We
spoke to the head of performing arts at a school in North Manchester. There are
one or two additional schools who run another Key Stage 4 course, such as BTEC.
But that leaves around half of the schools not delivering any Key Stage 4 music
at all, sadly. Around cities that have a vibrant heritage of music making of all
kinds, music's fading out. I think there's certain parts of our locality that
are quite deprived areas, the Greater Manchester region. And I think that must
play a factor. This is the thing that was really concerning to us. For example,
if you lived in some areas in the southeast of England, there were twice as
many, proportionally, young people doing A-level music as there were in the West
Midlands. Dr. Adam Whittaker, head of pedagogy at Royal Birmingham Conservatoire
again. We know that there are some parts around Merseyside where there isn't
even a place for you to do A-level music if you wanted to in a local authority.
Which must smack all of us in the head with a sort of irony in the land of the
Beatles, in places which are responsible for some of the most vibrant British
cultural phenomena. There may be other types of qualifications on offer, but
yeah, if you're a young musician who lives in this area, you can't do A-level
music unless your parents or family are prepared to drive you 35 miles to the
nearest school that does it. We have a music service within a music hub around
Manchester. There's eight or ten boroughs around Manchester and they're all
connected through one music hub. And there's lots of great work being done by
the hub and by each of those individual music services. But I just, I think the
access isn't there if schools aren't able to buy that in, if schools aren't able
to afford those services in-house. And then it's up to the parents to be able to
get them there or fund those lessons. There is a drive towards addressing the
inequalities that have deepened over the past decade. There are organisations
stepping in, like the Benedetti Foundation, which targets areas of the UK where
music education experiences are often restricted due to geographical or
financial barriers. Our ambition is huge. We want to get to as many local
boroughs and councils as we possibly can across the country. And that's actually
a five-year plan. Nicola Benedetti, superstar violinist who established the
foundation in 2019. Our job is to have very close ties with local boroughs and
councils and regions of the country to really ascertain actually what was going
on here, what has been lost, what teachers are trying to do something that
actually maybe with a boost from us, they could really start to achieve. The
Bolton Sessions took place earlier this year and brought together hundreds of
musicians in schools across Greater Manchester. I think days like this are
really important. There's so many young people who are the only person in their
school who play that instrument, for example, thinking of myself growing up in
Glasgow, I was the only person in my year at school who played the cello. So to
all of a sudden come together in this space and be with so many other people the
same age, going through the same journey of learning an instrument, it's just a
magical opportunity. David Munn and Rachel Cooper are tutors for the foundation.
I'm really excited. I don't think it's a down and out subject. I think that the
big thing for the success of music education in this country is the investment
in teachers. And I think sometimes we get a little bit sidetracked by spending
money on resources before we've actually spent money on good teaching. I'm
excited. I think that there are many more organisations now focused on teacher
development, teacher training and projects that are really, really getting down
to what is it that keeps children interested. You know, we start off the weekend
by saying, we embrace you making mistakes here. We only want to see that you're
trying as hard as possible. And just seeing them do that, they all just threw
themselves into it. What we're trying to do is come in with an absolutely
collaborative approach, support and embolden those that live and work locally
and leave them with something that makes their job more fulfilling and
highlights the great work that they do. The future of music education is in the
balance. But there are measures in place to try and remedy what's been happening
over the past 15 years. There are new national plans for music introduced by the
governments in England and Wales last year aiming to address the decline.
They're only just beginning to be rolled out and we'll be looking at their
potential impacts in later episodes. Where will tomorrow's musicians come from?
Institutions like conservatoires that feed the creative industries with highly
trained musicians are already having to adapt to a new environment as young
people emerge from their schooling without the level of opportunities that a
previous generation would have had. Adam Whittaker. We're not concerned that
we're not going to have any students. There is clearly an appetite and interest
for studying at institutions like Royal Birmingham Conservatoire or other kinds
of music colleges. But I do think that many of the programmes that we're
offering and the ways in which we're approaching things, we need to keep these
live, reflective discussions because young people are coming with a range of
needs, they're coming with a range of experiences and not to sort of see it as a
deficiency. It's actually something for us to learn and be responsive to how the
sector is as it stands today. For musicians, for music educators and for those
that are broadly in education and culture, there is a perception and existential
question, do we all believe that this is important? And if so, we need to put
those resources right by that belief. With intervention to address economic
inequalities and efforts to restore music-making opportunities to all kinds of
schools, we can keep the talent pipeline diverse, open, creative and relevant.
The stakes are high from the industry's point of view. This island exports so
much music across the whole of the world and music is something we do so well
and we want to be doing better, we want to be doing as well as we possibly can
do. And I think one of the challenges we do sometimes see is that other
countries are, they're behind us but they're catching up. Next time, we visit a
primary school in Bradford and a college in Kent where music is at the heart of
everything they do. We wouldn't need schools to commit to music as much as we do
but just the basics. And the moment you start to show how you feel is the first
step to actually getting better mental health. Give them the opportunity to
create. Rethinking Music was presented by Soweto Kinch and was produced in
Cardiff by Megan Jones. Soweto will be back at the same time next week. The
inside story of one man's war against racial segregation. The University of
Mississippi was a bastion of white supremacy. I didn't want them to know I was
not a regular white applicant. James Meredith's fight for civil rights and the
battle it triggered. People had their guns and were ready to do battle and they
did. What kind of future do you think Meredith has down at Ole Miss? I don't
think he's got a future if the troops leave. I mean I believe somebody will try
to kill him.