TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 at 11.30. This is Radio 4. It's five o'clock and time for PM with Anita Arnant.
Hello there. In the past few minutes, national ambulance strikes have been
suspended after the GMB and other unions agreed to talks with the government.
Also on PM, MPs investigating Partygate say Boris Johnson may have misled
Parliament four times. The former Prime Minister, however, reads that report
somewhat differently. The Privileges Committee have produced a report which I
believe totally vindicates me. We'll hear Boris Johnson's defence and we'll be
hearing from an ally of Sue Gray who investigated the parties at Downing Street.
A prominent US lawyer is jailed for life for the murder of his wife and son. A
man like this man should never be allowed to be among free law-abiding citizens
again. I'm innocent. I would never hurt my wife Maggie and I would never hurt my
son, Papa. It's a case that has gripped the United States. We're going to hear
from the maker of a true crime podcast that pushed the investigation. And Joe
and Joe Biden do it. But should you, would you order the same dish in a
restaurant as your dining companion? I own a restaurant and if I see in the
kitchen an order has come for two identical dishes, I come out and I interfere.
You've got to change your order. Well, let's start with the BBC News, read today
by Charles Carroll. MPs investigating Boris Johnson's conduct say there's
evidence that he may have misled the Commons about lockdown parties at Downing
Street on four occasions. The cross-party Privileges Committee has published an
update on its progress. The former Prime Minister will give evidence to the
inquiry later this month. He's denied misleading Parliament. Here's our
political correspondent Ian Watson. Boris Johnson declared that the Privileges
Committee had found absolutely no evidence that he'd misled Parliament, despite
it sifting through innumerable WhatsApps and messages. But that's not quite what
the committee's update says. In fact, it suggests that there is evidence that Mr
Johnson may have misled MPs on a number of occasions, including failing to tell
the House of Commons about his own knowledge of the gatherings at the heart of
government during the pandemic. And the committee stated that the evidence
strongly suggested that breaches of the Covid guidance would have been obvious
to Mr Johnson. The former Prime Minister also suggested it would be surreal for
the committee to rely on evidence from Sue Gray, the former senior civil servant
who carried out the Partigate probe and who has now been offered the job of
Chief of Staff to the Labour leader. The committee denied its report would be
based on Ms Gray's findings and would rely instead on documents, photographs and
witness statements. In the last few minutes, the GMB union says it suspended
strike action by ambulance workers in England next week because of what it said
was a huge shift from the government. It said the Department of Health had
agreed to discuss pay for both this year and next year, as well as improvements
to other terms and conditions. There's been no comment yet from the government.
And the government's expected to keep the energy price guarantee, which limits
domestic gas and electricity bills, at its current level for another three
months. The annual energy bill for an average household had been scheduled to
rise from April by £500 to £3,000 a year. Here's our Cost of Living
correspondent, Kevin Peachy. Officially, the level of government support remains
under review before the budgets later this month. Practically, suppliers have
been told to prepare bills for April with a dual possibility of the guarantee
changing or staying the same. Realistically, it's become even more likely that
the government will maintain support as it is now. Even so, a £400 discount on
everyone's bills this winter will come to an end, and there are questions
whether the £3 billion it would cost to extend the guarantee for three months
could be better spent if targeted at those struggling the most to pay their
bills. A man and a woman have been remanded in custody after appearing before
Crawley Magistrates Court charged with the manslaughter of a baby. The body of a
newborn was found in an allotment shed near Brighton earlier this week.
Constance Martin and Mark Gordon will appear at the Old Bailey later this month.
Our reporter, Youn Tunde Youssef, was at Crawley Magistrates Court. Constance
Martin and Mark Gordon both appeared. They spoke to give their names, to confirm
their addresses and their date of birth. Both of them declared that they were of
no fixed abode. And then the charges were read out by the magistrates, so that
was manslaughter, concealing the birth of a child and perverting the course of
justice. There's been widespread condemnation after a court in Belarus sentenced
the human rights activist and last year's Nobel Peace Prize winner Alias
Bilyatsky to 10 years in prison. The 60-year-old was convicted of smuggling
money into the country and financing protests, charges which he denies. The
Norwegian Nobel Committee described the ruling as a tragedy, and the EU said it
was another example of the regime in Belarus trying to silence those who stand
up in defence of human rights. A prominent lawyer in the United States has been
given two consecutive life sentences for the murder of his wife and son at their
mansion in South Carolina in 2021. Prosecutors said Alex Murdoch had carried out
the murders to distract attention from financial crimes. And the former England
cricket captain, Michael Vaughan, has again denied claims that he made racist
comments towards his former team-mate Azim Rafiq. He told the Disciplinary
Hearing, which is looking into claims of racism at Yorkshire County Cricket
Club, that it was inconceivable that he referred to several Asian team-mates in
2009, including Azim Rafiq, as you lot. Charles, thank you very much indeed. As
you have been hearing just moments before we came on air, national ambulance
strikes have been suspended after the GMB and other unions agreed to talks with
the government. Now this comes after Steve Barclay signalled that he was willing
to discuss a one-off cost of living payment for the current year. Zoe Conway is
our employment correspondent and can tell us more. I mean, it's kind of 11th
hour stuff. What has happened here? So three unions, the Unison, GMB, Charter
Society of Physiotherapists, they have all announced in the last few minutes
that they're calling off their strikes. The one union that they were all, four
unions were meeting this afternoon, the fourth union, Unite, has decided not to
suspend strikes. Now, not to downplay the importance of Unite, it's a big union,
but in terms of health workers, the really two critical unions for the
government to get on board were Unison and GMB. So it's significant that the two
of them have decided to pause their strikes that were going to be happening next
week. Why? Well, what the government, as you say, has been signalling is that
it's prepared to offer a one-off payment for this year. We're expecting it to be
unconsolidated. That means it doesn't stay forever more in your pay packet. It's
a one-off payment. We don't know how much. It's interesting that that's what
they're offering because throughout this dispute, Steve Barclay, the Health
Secretary, has been making it clear that he recognised that a one-off payment
this year for 2022-23 was going to be essential to solve the dispute. But for
months, that's not what's been offered. Why has there been this change? Well, I
think we can draw the conclusion that what's changed is that the Prime Minister
has got behind the idea of needing to offer more money for this financial year.
In terms of what else we think is on the table, well, the unions also said
you've got to address this year. You've also got to, there's got to be some
movement on 2023-24, so the next financial year starting in April. And we also
want an assurance this is not coming out of existing budgets. And they've
clearly got those three things because they're going to go into talks possibly
as early as Monday. And what the government asking for in return, a pause to
strikes and asking the unions to recommend this deal to their members. Zoe,
thank you very much indeed. Rachel Harrison is the General Secretary of the GMB
Union. She told me initially that she had had misgivings about the government
offer of talks. Yesterday, we received an invitation from the Department of
Health to enter into paid negotiations with the Staff Council. We weren't happy
with the initial letter that we received with some of the uncertainties that
laid within it. Last night, we received some reassuring messages that make us
feel potentially there are going to be constructive pay negotiations. So at this
time, we're expecting to suspend the current action scheduled for next week. But
we are ready to immediately reinstate notices for further industrial action if
we believe the pay negotiations are not constructive or meaningful. As far as we
understand, Stephen Barclay has sent a letter to your organisation and to other
unions to say, look, we are now willing as the government to discuss a non-
consolidated one-off payment for the current financial year as well as a pay
deal for 2023 to 2024. Would that be enough for you? Well, there's a lot of
things we want to talk about. But we've been clear from the very start of this
that although we're willing to enter into discussions around improvements to
terms and conditions, this dispute is about this year's pay. So it is important
that there is an offer in there to settle the dispute by talking about this
year's pay. I can't comment on whether that will be acceptable once we get in
that room and see what that looks like. It will be GMB members that decide that.
But what we do have to recognise is that throughout this entire dispute, GMB and
the other health unions have been calling on the government to enter into pay
negotiations with us, and that is what we have achieved. We've got a guarantee
that pay negotiations will commence as soon as possible, and that's what we've
all been asking for. I mean, you're sort of suggesting that there is unity among
all of the unions, but the RCN, the union that represents nurses, were called in
last week. They seem to be treading a different path to you. I mean, is that the
case? Well, obviously, I can't comment on behalf of other unions or their
positions on any of this. What I can say is what we have wanted from the start
is pay negotiations through the formal structures of the NHS staff council that
covers the agenda for change contracts, which people across the NHS and
ambulance are on. And those are the talks that we want to be a part of. It's not
acceptable for the workforce to be divided, and the nurses are just as much a
part of the workforce as our ambulance members are. So we want the pay
negotiations to be done the right way through the staff council structures on
agenda for change contracts, and that is what the government have now offered
us. What is the minimum offer you would like to see? Well, obviously, we've
requested from the start a significant increase in pay. We've talked about a
retention package that looks to restore a decade of lost earnings and a wide
variety of other workforce conditions and terms. So that is what we will be
entering that room hoping to achieve. As I've said before, we will not put a
number on what is acceptable and what isn't because that will be the decision of
GMB members. And just one more time to the Royal College of Nursing's decision
to temporarily and unilaterally call off strikes last week. How much did that
hurt or hinder your own negotiations? As I said, I can't speak about why RCN
took the decision they did. For us, we believe in standing as the collective in
any negotiations across the NHS. We're all covered under the Agenda for Change
Handbook. We're all a part of the NHS staff council. So for GMB, we believe all
negotiations should happen with all of the relevant bodies at the table.
Dividing the workforce only serves to unsettle the workforce even more. It makes
those that sit outside those chosen categories feel that they are worthless and
that they're not valued. And what we need to be doing is putting our arms around
all of the NHS workforce and not trying to divide them and set them against each
other. That was Rachel Harrison, the General Secretary of the GMB Union. The
time is now coming up to 13 minutes past five. And here's Charles with the
headlines. Reports say that the last roads leading westwards from the Ukrainian
city of Bakhmut are under heavy Russian barrage in an apparent strategy to block
all evacuation routes for Ukrainian soldiers. The Ministry of Defence has been
ordered to pay a former Royal Marine more than £700,000 in compensation for loss
of hearing. Lawyers for James Barry argued that he was given inadequate
protection while conducting military exercises. And the Royal Mail has announced
that from April the price of a first-class stamp will rise above a pound for the
first time. Charles, thank you very much. It is the case that has been gripping
America for three and a half years now. Today, a powerful South Carolina lawyer,
Alex Murdoch, has been given two life sentences for the murder of his wife and
son. Now, this case has been filled with drama right until its conclusion. Here
in the closing remarks, the prosecutor Creighton Waters describes what it was
like seeing the defendant each day during the court proceedings. No one who
thought they were close to this man knew who he really was and, Your Honour,
that's chilling. And I've looked in his eyes and he liked to stare me down as he
would walk by me during this trial. And I could see the real Alex Murdoch when
he looked at me. The depravity, the callousness, the selfishness of these crimes
are stunning. The lack of remorse and the effortless way in which he lies,
including here, sitting right over there in this witness stand. Your Honour, a
man like that, a man like this man should never be allowed to be among free law-
abiding citizens again. Well, if you thought that was dramatic, when it came to
the defense barrister's final remarks, he handed over straight to the accused,
Alex Murdoch himself. Good morning, Your Honour. I'm innocent. I would never
hurt my wife Maggie and I would never hurt my son, Pawpaw. Well, it was short,
but as I said, dramatic. Much credit is being given to the investigative
journalism of Mandy Matney and Liz Farrell. Their Murdoch Murders podcast
challenged the official investigation in a jurisdiction where the Murdoch family
is so supremely powerful that a portrait of the accused's grandfather was
hanging in the very courtroom where he was being tried. Liz Farrell joins us
now. Liz, thank you very much for taking the time to speak to us. My pleasure.
For those who haven't been devouring the podcast, just tell us a little more
about Alex Murdoch and his family. Well, this isn't your normal murder trial.
This is much, much bigger. It is about corruption. It is about a family that
throughout history, generations in this area of South Carolina, they were the
law and they were able to get away with, I guess, whatever they got into, is
really the saying. So it's called Murdoch country where I live here and where
Mandy and I have been reporting from. And this was a big, big moment for South
Carolina because we never thought that we would see it get this far. And I just
give great credit to everyone here who just worked so hard to make this happen
because the Murdochs are a powerful force here. Now, at first, Alex Murdoch
presented himself as the grieving father and he claimed all sorts of alternative
theories as to who shot his wife and his son at close range. What were some of
the things that were flying around? Well, you have to understand with Alec
Murdoch, he grew up knowing exactly who he was in this state and knowing that
whatever he said was true was something that everyone had to believe was true.
So his theories weren't that elaborate. They weren't that well thought out. He
blamed it on, at first, the boat crash victims. There was a 2019 boat crash here
in which a young woman named Mallory Beach was killed. And he blamed it as
retribution for that because his son was driving the boat and was facing three
felony charges at the time of his murder. So that's one of the major theories.
The other theories were very loose as well, but he never had anything specific.
Nothing specific. But I mean, you sort of seem to suggest that that might have
been a different era been enough if you had the name Murdoch. It clearly wasn't
this time around. What was the motivation for these killings? I believe the
motivation is shifting, I would say. It's a lot of things. He stole more than $8
million from his law firm and from clients. And on top of that, he had a decade-
long scheme going on. And it was about to be found out because of the civil case
in the boat crash. So Mallory Beach's family was suing him and they hired a very
tenacious attorney to represent them. And he went hard. He was asking to look at
his finances and Ellick was claiming to be broke. And they just knew that simply
couldn't be true. And so he was basically days away from having to hand over a
list of his bank accounts. And had they got that, they would have seen that he
had been stealing for years. Okay. So I mean, this is as mundane as just to sort
of change the narrative by doing something as brutal as slaying your family. So
people feel sorry for you and talk about something else. Well, I feel sorry is
one thing. And I think there's great evidence of that. There was a lot of
sympathy that he benefited from. But I also think he was eliminating a problem.
And I also think that he was a family annihilator, which is he could no longer
provide for his family. These were two dependents. Maggie didn't work and Paul
didn't work. And he provided them a good life. And Moselle, the hunting property
where they were killed, was a paradise for Paul. It was his greatest love. And I
think that Ellick knew that he might lose it someday. I mean, there's been an
explosion of successful crime casts of late, if we can put it that way, you
know, The Teacher's Pet, Serial, S-Town. And they're credited with sort of
pushing along investigations. What role do you think you played in getting to
this verdict? I honestly don't think we would have gotten this far with the
state investigating him. I think it would be much easier for the state not to
have investigated Ellick Murdoch. It would have been much easier for them if it
was someone else. So I think they needed all eyes on them. I think they needed
accountability. I think they needed to have no other answer than we need to do
our job to the fullest extent. And they did it. They did their job to the
fullest extent. And I mean, this is not over because there are other outstanding
charges and even perhaps more even perhaps murders which are up in the air. Liz
Farrell, I'm really grateful for your time. Thank you very much. Thank you very
much. I appreciate it. Good talking to you. The time is now coming up to 20 past
five. The Housing Secretary, Michael Gove, has said the government wants to
reform the leasehold system and put people in control of their own homes. In
what seemed to be a major shake up to the home ownership rules, Mr. Gove said he
knew that people had been saving for years to purchase their dream properties,
only to be thwarted by what he called the fundamentally unfair leasehold system.
And he's now promised sweeping changes with legislation that could come as soon
as the autumn. Our political correspondent Alex Forsyth has been to Leeds to
meet some leaseholders. Hi, Alan, it's Alex from BBC News. Please come in. Thank
you so much. I've come to meet Alan, who lives in an apartment on a new
development on the outskirts of Leeds. He bought it nearly six years ago on a
leasehold basis. At the start of this year, Alan and some of his neighbours were
landed with bills they didn't expect. When I actually saw that the bill was for
the amount of money, nearly 900 pounds, I think my jaw dropped. The charges were
for ground rent, an annual charge leaseholders pay the freeholder for the ground
their property is on. Alan and his neighbours were told their ground rent was
going up and the extra amount was being backdated, in Alan's case, to before he
even moved in. I just thought, how can they charge this amount of money asking
for arrears, even asking for money when I actually wasn't in the property? It
was soul destroying, soul destroying. The company which had recently bought the
freehold had reviewed the ground rents as they were entitled to in line with the
terms of the leases and adjusted them for inflation. They have now agreed
residents will only have to pay the increased amount for the time they've lived
in their properties and they've offered payment plans. But Alison, one of Alan's
neighbours, says it's left her feeling vulnerable. It's frightening, it really
is, because if you do not pay it they can repossess your property and it's like,
well, I've got a mortgage, I want to own this property and that's very, very
scary. So it's left you worried for the future? Oh, absolutely. I've got three
young children and, you know, that's extra money that we really can't afford to
be paying at this current time. The government did bring in legislation to end
ground rents for most new leasehold properties last year, but it's not
retrospective. And the senior Conservative MP, Sir Peter Bottomley, who chairs
the all-party parliamentary group on leasehold, said much wider reform of the
whole system is long overdue to give people more rights over their properties,
fees and charges they may face, or help them buy their freeholds. This sort of
system and the potential for exploitation doesn't exist elsewhere, it shouldn't
exist here. I think, except for really exceptional circumstances, no new
leasehold properties should be created. When the property's been developed, the
freehold should be owned by the people who live in the places, common holders in
effect. The Housing Secretary, Michael Gove, is understood to be looking at
whether a move to commonhold could work. He said he wants to end what he's
called the feudal leasehold system, with legislation promised for the King's
Speech. But there are questions over how far it will go, whether this
government's got the time and political capital to commit to a total overhaul or
focus on greater protection for leaseholders in the current system. Hello,
Emily. Hi, I'm Alex from BBC. How are you doing? Back in Leeds, Emily says some
change is needed. She's owned her flat on a leasehold basis for five years. I
was so proud when I bought the flat, like I can't even explain how proud I was
for being on the property ladder. Like many others, the reality of her situation
as a leaseholder was exposed following the Grenfell Tower tragedy. Her building
needs remedial safety work, and the building's been in the works for a long
time. She was facing a bill for her share of the work for £100,000. Now, the
government has agreed to fund it, but the work hasn't started while the building
and estate owners negotiate, and as a leaseholder, the timescale's out of her
hands. I saw the flats very much while I was in my 20s, working in the city
centre, but five years on, I feel like I've outgrown the flat. I'm going to have
to wait for these works to be completed before I can even consider selling,
basically. So, I have no idea how long I'm going to be stuck in this flat for
now. There's no way I would have bought this flat if I'd known the years of
financial and emotional stress that it would cause. I know that I'll never buy a
leasehold again. Alex Forsyth reporting now. You're listening to PM with me,
Anita Arnott. Now, Glastonbury finds itself under a cloud, but not the usual
rain-dumping variety. This is all to do with who you will and will not see
headlining this year. Well, that was Guns N' Roses, the Arctic Monkeys and Sir
Elton John, as if you needed me to tell you that. But where are all the women?
The festival's coming under increasing fire for having an all-white, all-male
headline list. Festival organiser Emily Evis has blamed the lack of female
headliners as a pipeline problem in the industry, which she says starts way back
with the record companies and with radio. She said, I can shout as loud as I
like, but we need to get everyone on board. So is that right? Is this an endemic
issue or could Glastonbury do better? I spoke to Aubrey Whitfield about this, a
music producer and songwriter who's worked with the likes of Kelly Clarkson,
Little Mix and Charlotte Kelly of Soul to Soul. I do agree that generally right
across the board in the music industry, there is a lack of female
representation. It is quite an issue. But I think with the festivals, there is a
few things to consider. The first thing really is that over the last year, there
hasn't been as many major female artists releasing albums. And of course, when
you release an album, an artist tends to go out and tour and part of that tour
tends to be the festivals. So of course, I think that's going to reflect in the
lineup. And you know, we saw this at the Brit Awards earlier in the year as
well. There was a lack of female representation in the best artist category now
that they've been merged together. And again, I think it comes down to the same
things that not as many female artists have been releasing albums in the last
year. So we will see a little bit of a dip this year on the festival circuit.
But I still think there needs to be more kind of representation right across the
board. Well, I mean, you know, there is that old saying, you cannot be what you
cannot see. So I mean, how discouraging is this going to be? You know, another
major festival after the Brit Awards, you know, another major event in the
public eye. And so few women, you know, leading the charge. It's really
disappointing that artists like Lizzo, who have absolutely smashed it over the
last year isn't getting a headline in slot at Glastonbury in particular. I mean,
as we know, there's very few female producers out there and very few female
artists compared to male artists. And it could be discouraging for the next
generation. But I do think that on the independent scene in particular, there is
a good gender balance between male and female. And I think that if the festivals
can do more to kind of bring in some of that independent talent, particularly
Glastonbury, who have an emergent talent stage and they they kind of get behind
independent artists, there's a huge opportunity there to kind of highlight some
really talented female artists and just kind of, you know, help balance that out
a little bit. I mean, Emily Avis has been talking about a pipeline issue that,
you know, look to the record companies, if you want to criticise this or look to
radio stations and who they choose to play. I mean, where would you place Falls?
I know you're saying that not many albums by women were released this year, but,
you know, is there a problem even further down the track? I think Emily Avis is
absolutely spot on with that. I think that there is kind of that boys club
culture in the record labels. And I hate to say that, but it is true, more so of
the major labels. And they do tend to go to the male artist or male producers
or, you know, whoever songwriters that they kind of trust and have built long
term relationships with. I am starting to see kind of an increase in interest
and kind of recognising female talent and bringing them in. But it is quite deep
rooted. I think it needs a huge culture shift. And I don't think that that is
something that can change overnight. I think it will take a little bit of time.
Well, go on then, Aubrey. I mean, you've made a very successful career in what
has historically been a boys club. If you had to make one change to the
industry, wave of magic one, what would you change? For me, I think the issue
does lie with the record labels, particularly the major labels. And I think that
they really need to start bringing in talented female artists, nurturing them,
kind of putting all of their weight behind and just making them a success. And I
do feel at the minute that male artists tend to get that little bit more
priority. So I would change that record labels, bring it on more female artists.
Music producer Aubrey Whitfield talking to me a little bit earlier. Now, you did
hear her knocking on doors and ringing on doorbells, not just a few minutes ago.
Alex Forsyth is back though. With details of tonight's any questions? Hi, Anita.
Yeah, I've been in Leeds all week and I am still in Leeds now for tonight's
programme. We're at the Holbeck, which is a community venue. In fact, it's
thought to be one of the oldest working men's clubs in the UK. And with me
later, I will have the Conservative MP Miriam Cates, the Labour MP Kim
Ledbetter, the Lib Dem MP Wendy Chamberlain and local Leeds businessman Lee
Powell. And it feels like one of those weeks when anything could come up. Party
gates back in the news, so is Sue Gray. Some unions have paused strike action,
perhaps it's energy bills that's caught attention. So we will see what our
audience ask and we will try to get some answers. If you're around 8pm, join us
live or you can catch us tomorrow at 10 past one. Alex, thank you very much. And
we'll be talking about that Privileges Committee in just a little while. It is
now though 5.30 and here's Charles with the news. Three health unions have
agreed to negotiate with the government about pay and they've suspended a series
of strikes in England. Two days of action involving ambulance workers with
Unison and GMB won't go ahead next week. A walkout next month by the Chartered
Society of Physiotherapy has also been postponed. But the Unite union has
rejected the offer of talks. 3,000 of its members who are ambulance staff will
continue with their strike on Monday. The Department of Health hasn't commented.
A parliamentary body that's investigating whether Boris Johnson misled MPs about
lockdown parties at Downing Street says there's evidence that he did so multiple
times. The Cross-Party Privileges Committee said in an interim report that Covid
breaches would have been obvious to the former Prime Minister at the time. Boris
Johnson has denied misleading the Commons and claims to have been vindicated by
the probe's interim findings. He'll give evidence to the inquiry later this
month. Mr Johnson also said that it was a peculiarity that the former civil
servant who led the investigation into Downing Street parties was now seeking to
become Sir Keir Starmer's Chief of Staff. Some Conservative MPs have questioned
whether Sue Gray was impartial in conducting her probe. Labour have said that
they will abide by the decision of Parliament's anti-corruption watchdog, the
Advisory Committee on Business Appointments, which will decide whether the move
is suitable. The BBC understands that the Chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, is set to
extend government support for household energy bills for three months until
June. A subsidy limiting the average annual bill to £2,500 is due to end in
April, but it's now thought that this will continue. A separate £400 winter
discount will end as planned this month. And the committee that awards the Nobel
Peace Prize has strongly condemned the jailing in Belarus of last year's winner,
the activist Alias Bilyatsky. He was convicted of smuggling money into the
country to fund protests, charges he denies. The Nobel Committee said his
10-year sentence showed that President Lukashenko's regime would use all means
to suppress its critics. Charles, thank you very much. I suppose one could call
this the tale of two chitties. One report, two very, very different
interpretations, with both the former Prime Minister Boris Johnson and the
opposition claiming vindication. The cross-party Privileges Committee
investigation into so-called Partygate, the social events that took place at
Downing Street during lockdown, is yet to finish its inquiry. But it did update
us today on its thinking. It says, number one, there is evidence that strongly
suggests breaches of coronavirus rules would have been obvious to Boris Johnson
at the time. And number two, the House of Commons may have been misled multiple
times. Boris Johnson was quick to respond. He spoke to our reporter, Helen Cadd.
I didn't mislead the House, and I don't believe I'm guilty of a contempt. I
think that this process happily will vindicate me. I know it's been going on for
a long time. I'm grateful to the committee. Let's just remember what this is all
about. I believe that what we were doing was within the rules. And that's why I
said what I said to Parliament. And I believe that what we were doing was in
conformity with the Covid regulation. So that is why I said what I said in
Parliament. And that's why I don't think, I'm certain there's been no contempt.
I do think it is a peculiarity, let me put it that way, that the person who
conducted the inquiry into what went on in number 10 and the Cabinet Office, who
was presented to me as a person of complete political impartiality with
absolutely no political axe to grind, whatever, has just been appointed the
Chief of Staff of the Leader of the Labour Party. I mean, I make no comment
about it, except to say I'm sure people may want to draw their own conclusions
about the confidence they can place in her motives behind her, the way she
conducted her inquiry into her report. I think if you told me at the time I
commissioned Sue Gray to do the inquiry, if you told me all the stuff that I now
know, I think I might have cross-examined her more closely about her
independence. And I might have thought about whether she was, I might have
asked, I might have invited, let me put it this way, I might have invited her to
reflect on whether she was really the right person to do it. Well, you heard
Boris Johnson reference it a few times there. Sue Gray did announce yesterday
that she was leaving the civil service and taking a job as Chief of Staff for
Labour's leader, Sir Keir Starmer. Sir Keir urged the Prime Minister to act
quickly when the Privileges Committee publishes its final report. I think the
evidence of wrongdoing by Boris Johnson is already pretty damning. I think it's
important to bear in mind that Rishi Sunak at the time was obviously very close
to all of this and sat on his hands. Rishi Sunak, who also of course got fined
in this process, is under a very heavy obligation now to ensure that we move
forward as fast as we can with the Covid inquiry and he absolutely acts on any
recommendations that come in the interim. Well, let's speak to our political
correspondent about all this. David Wallace-Lockhart is with us. First of all,
David, what has the committee been basing its findings on so far? So what the
Privileges Committee is looking into is the key question of whether Boris
Johnson knowingly misled MPs in his comments about Partygate. He stood up in the
Commons and said that the rules were followed at all times. We now know that's
not the case and there are plenty of fines that are testament to that. When in
this interim report they've published, they talk about it being, in their words,
should have been obvious to Boris Johnson when he attended certain events that
they were against the rules. They then put a link to the footnotes, which if you
scroll down to has pictures of him at events surrounded by people that doesn't
look very socially distanced with Prosecco bottles on the table. Of course,
Boris Johnson is relying on that argument that when he said to the Commons that
no rules were broken, that's because he genuinely believed that to be the case.
Therefore, he knowingly misled no one. And that's essentially what this comes
down to. He does not feel that the Privileges Committee have managed to prove
that he knowingly misled the House. I mean, he's come as near as dammit to
saying, you know, the evidence cannot be trusted because it comes from Sue Gray.
Tell us a bit more about this. Yeah, that's right. So that's an important aspect
of all of this. Of course, Sue Gray was the civil servant who did at one point
her own inquiry into what had happened at those lockdown parties in Downing
Street. We now know, of course, she's left the civil service planning to take a
job as Sir Keir Starmer's Chief of Staff. Boris Johnson is indicating that that
means perhaps people should, in his words, start asking questions about her
inquiry. But the Privileges Committee is saying, number one, they are not basing
their report on Sue Gray's report. So they're saying that while they may be
looking at the same events, they are not using Sue Gray's report as evidence.
And also an argument we're hearing from a lot of people from the Labour Party to
the FDA, the union that represents civil servants, is that Sue Gray has a long
career where she is a distinguished civil servant. And to start suggesting that
because she is moving into a political role, she is therefore, in her past,
being political is unfair and not a fair reflection of how the civil service
works and expects its staff to work. Now, we're expecting the Prime Minister to
speak to the committee in a couple of weeks. What if after hearing what he has
to say, the committee finds against him? What happens next? So there are a lot
of ifs here, but it could get quite difficult for Boris Johnson because the
committee can recommend certain sanctions. Those sanctions could range from
apologising to the Commons to actually a suspension from the Commons. And if an
MP is suspended for two weeks, they can then face locally a recall petition,
which ultimately can lead to them losing their seat and a by-election taking
place, a by-election that they could run in. But of course, that is potentially
where this could get very sticky for Boris Johnson. But important to stress, the
committee has not reached any final conclusions yet. It hasn't heard from Boris
Johnson yet. So we're still a while off getting to that situation. But important
to be conscious that things could potentially go that way. David Wallace-
Lockhart, thank you very much indeed. Let's talk about this a bit more with Sir
Jonathan Jones-Casey. He was the head of the government's legal department
between 2014 and 2020. So, Sir Jonathan, the committee says breaches of the
COVID rules would have been obvious to the Prime Minister. Boris Johnson is
saying he never misled anyone. I mean, this sort of feels like Schrodinger's
inquiry. Can both things be true at the same time? Well, they can't both be
true. And sooner or later, the committee will have to reach a final conclusion,
which it hasn't yet done. So this is an interim report, as you've just heard.
And the committee has received now quite a large body of evidence, including
internal emails and diary entries and photographs and so on, and WhatsApp
messages from Boris Johnson to officials. And they've also received, they say,
written evidence from 23 witnesses. So they received a significant body of
evidence, and they have reached in this report some interim findings. And the
interim findings are that they say there is evidence that the House of Commons
may have been misled by Boris Johnson in a variety of ways. And they set out the
rather, I think, and they set out the rather sharp questions that they think Mr.
Johnson has to answer for why he said what he did say, and why he didn't later
on correct incorrect things which he'd said. So at this stage, what the
committee is really doing is setting out the case which they think Mr. Johnson
has now to answer in light of the evidence which they've received. I mean, I
think it might surprise some people that, you know, they've gone into this level
of detail before actually seeing him and hearing him speak. Yes, it is pretty
detailed. They say they are sharing all the evidence with Mr. Johnson. So this
is all part of their attempt to be as open and transparent as possible. It is
pretty detailed. And as I say, they set out some, you know, pretty sharp
questions. For example, how it can be that Mr. Johnson told the House of Commons
that no guidance had been broken when he knew what the guidance was, and was in
attendance at gatherings where the guidance was reached. So they go into that
level. They do. But I mean, you know, with your KC hat on, can you see any
defence that, you know, you would be convinced by from Boris Johnson? It's very
difficult to see how there can be one. But as I keep saying, this is an interim
stage, he has to be given an opportunity to put his side of the story. And there
is to be a hearing at which he'll do that. So we don't know what he will say.
I've just heard what he said publicly. That doesn't, to my mind, amount to any
new evidence. It's just assertion. So we'll have to see what he says. Sure. He
did, however, say very clearly, I thought, without saying it explicitly that,
you know, you can't trust Sue Gray. And if I'd have known that she was going to
work for Sir Keir Starmer, I would have asked very different questions of her
and I would have trusted her less. What do you make of that? Well, as you just
heard from your correspondent, the Privileges Committee is carrying out its own
inquiry. It's not relying on the Sue Gray report. It's received the material
that she had. But it's also, as I've said, received a whole load of other
evidence. And it itself has sought witness evidence from a number of
individuals. And it will hear from Boris Johnson itself. So it will reach its
own conclusions. It's not dependent on what Sue Gray did. So it's difficult to
see how in any sense her position makes any difference now to what the
Privileges Committee is doing. But I mean, can I say this? I mean, Sue Gray is a
friend and was a colleague for many years. As others have said, she's been an
outstanding public servant and she's served successive governments, Labour,
Conservative coalition governments with great professionalism and distinction.
And this is just a personal view. But in my view, it's quite wrong to think that
if she's now entitled to move out of the Civil Service into a political role,
many others have done that. The fact she's doing that doesn't in any way
contaminate the outstanding work she's done as a civil servant, including this
really difficult task which Mr Johnson himself asked her to do, which is to
investigate Partygate. Sir Jonathan Jones, thank you very much indeed. It is now
coming up to a quarter to six. And here's Charles with the headlines. A woman in
Belgium who murdered her five children has been euthanized at her own request. A
lawyer for Genevieve Lemmitte confirmed that she died on Tuesday, the 16th
anniversary of her crime. Buckingham Palace has announced that the King will
make his first overseas visits as monarch to France and Germany later this
month. And Lewis Hamilton has been given permission to wear a nose stud during
competitive races, despite a Formula One ban on drivers wearing jewellery while
in their car. Charles, thank you very much. More than half the world's
population will be overweight or obese, and the number of people who are
overweight will be at least two times as many as those who are obese. But what
if there was a magic bullet solution? Or more precisely, a magic needle
solution? There's a lot of interest right now in a new class of weight loss drug
that seems to have won devotees predictably over the last year. And it's a new
drug that's been around for a long time. And it's a new drug that's been around
for a long time. And it's a new drug that's been around for a long time. And it
seems to have won devotees predictably among Hollywood stars, TikTok
commentators, Elon Musk, and now it seems The Times columnist David Aaronovitch
too, who had a piece in today's paper about his experience using, is it Ozempik?
Is that how I say it, David? Actually, I don't think I've ever been called upon
Let's go for a Zen pick. Okay, let's do a Zen pick then. Okay, so first of all,
what is this thing that you injected into yourself? Well, it's a substance
called semaglutide, which essentially, there's quite a kind of complex
scientific explanation for it, but essentially alters your metabolism so that in
effect, you digest more slowly, your stomach empties more slowly, and the
consequence of this is that you feel full for longer. So in other words, you
don't have as great an appetite as you would otherwise have, and the thought of
eating a significant amount of food becomes not something which is hugely
attractive and in fact, in my experience, my own personal experience, it's meant
that I haven't felt hungry at all. I can go for half a day, a day even without
feeling hungry without eating. How much have you dropped? I've dropped a stone
without, and I have to say, I decided to do this to test the actual properties
of the drug by not dieting at the same time. In other words, by not changing
anything that I chose to do or counting calories or worrying about it at all,
but simply by being guided by what it is that I wanted to do. And I think a lot
of people who are overweight and tend to overweight and have for a long time
will understand when I say that the business of not having to continuously
obsess about what it is that you're doing and trying, you know, this business of
exercising continuous willpower, which of course, very few people actually do
over the long term or can establish, is a kind of the removal of a tyranny,
frankly. Well, I mean, there are going to be people saying, look, David, just
skip putting, go for a run. What are you putting into yourself? I mean, were
there side effects of this? There are some side effects. I mean, can I just say
about this, this kind of, you know, go for a run? A lot of people who are
overweight do go for a run and they still have the weight. They do exercise and
they still have the weight. They try diets and then those diets collapse upon
them. They go back to the weight in which they were before. So let's just kind
of get rid of the willpower stuff, really. I mean, most people have been
overweight for a considerable amount of time, have heard all the arguments and
have tried all the kinds of remedies. So I don't think, I honestly, I want to
argue against that as a, it's the kind of thing that people who are naturally
very thin tell people who tend to be overweight. And I think we've had enough of
it. Okay, stay with us. I mean, this could be revolutionary, a one jab solution.
Is it a dream come true? So Paul Gately is Professor of Exercise and Obesity at
Leeds Beckett University. I mean, just, you know, David said, look, there are
side effects, but he's very passionate. He said, you know what, people do try
and don't talk down to us. And you know, I've never really thought of David, you
being particularly overweight. But Paul, I mean, what does this do to the human
body? I mean, how safe is it? Well, good evening. And David makes a very
important point about on a number of different levels here. So first of all, as
David is absolutely right, it reduces our food intake through impacting on our
appetite and also slows digestion as well. So that's those feelings of fullness
are there, as David outlined. I think, you know, what we've got to appreciate is
this is not a miracle cure insofar as, as David outlined, most of those sort of
diet, exercise or other regimens will unfortunately be the same for Zempik. So
when people stop, the evidence is pretty clear. Once we stop taking a
medication, the weight will come back on. So in a sense, it is another short
term tactic. Now that doesn't mean to say it's not valuable. And I would, I'm
not so strongly dismissive of diet and exercise, because what we really need is
a mix. We really need a mix of all those because our lifestyle is variable and
mixed. So when we're busy, we may be eating a bit less of a healthy diet and we
may be finding it more difficult to be physically active when we're facing
difficult times in our life. We have it as an impact on many different aspects
of our life. And I guess what we've got to move from, as David rightly points
out, is this attitude that we need everybody to be skinny. But equally, we can't
have an attitude that says this weight loss drug for a period of time will solve
the problem, because it won't. It's just another tool in the toolbox. Just like
exercise can be a tool if done in the right way, and diet can be a tool. And
what I prefer to see is we see all of these tools tailored to the needs of
people. Because not everybody will tolerate Zempik, not everyone will lose
weight from it. And a lot of people will regain the weight back once it stops.
So I think we've got to be more pragmatic. It is not saying Zempik isn't
helpful, but equally I'm not saying it's a miracle cure to solve obesity either.
Well, the thing is, something obviously has to be done about the obesity
epidemic. Because this report, the same report that had the numbers I quoted
earlier, says the cost of obesity is going to amount to more than $4 trillion
annually by 2035. What is the cost of using this drug, even for an amount of
time, that gets people into a healthy position? So well, the costs are variable
really. In terms of, you know, it's likely to be available in the NHS, so people
will get it prescribed and therefore it will be just prescription charges. But
there will also be, you know, your pharmacist will be selling it and will be
selling different variety of options. And so there's different ways in which
people will be able to access the drug. But effectively, it's really about, you
know, in a sense we know it's cost effective. So to David's point, people will
lose weight. And I think that's really important to know. But it's all part of a
rich mix. And you're absolutely right, Anita, that the cost of obesity is so
significant that we have to do something. But you know, Azempic cannot be the
only solution to that problem. Right. Now, I just want to go back to David just
very briefly. I mean, David, are you on Azempic now forever? Or are you going to
come off it? And if you do come off it, are you worried that the weight will
come back on? Yeah, yeah, I think that's the answer is we simply don't know
really at the moment. It's not been around long enough and being used for long
enough. We don't have any long term trials over the long term effects of Azempic
on people who are obese. We know it's well tolerated for diabetics over a long
period. So it probably could be. I simply don't know the answer to that
question. And I completely agree with the notion. I mean, exercise is a good
thing in itself, whether or not you're overweight. I mean, it's just it just has
all kinds of other benefits. And having a decent diet, in other words, putting
the right things in, etc. I'm completely convinced is a very good thing to do.
And that can be a question of what kind of food stuffs you use and so on. But
that toolbox is I know I note in the piece that the American Academy of
Pediatrics has now recommended that some of the glutei be one of the things that
can be used for adolescents and younger obese patients. And I think that shows
that it is going to be part of what we do going forward. Very good talking to
you. Thank you very much. That's David Aronovich and also Professor Paul Gately.
The time is now 5.53. Here's something to chew on, if you will. There's a lively
discussion in newspaper think pieces today about Joe and Jill Biden and what
they do when they go out to dinner. Now, if you read the stuff from both sides
of the pond, you might be forgiven, forgiven for thinking that the first couple
of the modern day Howard and Hilda and fans of ever decreasing circles will know
exactly what I mean. A sweet but slightly boring couple that dress the same,
care about the same things and pretty much have merging, slightly vanilla
personalities. This all comes from the fact that when the president and first
lady go out to dinner, they order the same thing. It's grilled bread and butter,
chicory salad, rigatoni with sausage ragu, since you're asking. And in fact, if
you put Joe Biden rigatoni into an Internet search, you are going to be consumed
by a regurgitation of vitriol on this subject. How can they be ordering the same
thing? But is it really that weird? Let's talk to Asma Khan, founder of
Darjeeling Express, the restaurant. Asma, is it that weird if somebody came in
with their partner and said, look, I'd like to have exactly the same thing? What
would you say? It would concern me. Because I think that if you're going to a
restaurant, especially in today's day, you know, people are eating out less. You
know, it is an occasion when you go out and you should try new things and you
should try different things. Because I don't I think it's really nice to share.
And if you've gone out with someone for a dinner, you presume you like them and
they wouldn't mind sharing your food with them. But it just is I don't know, it
just lacks imagination. That if both of you end up ordering the same thing, it's
a little hard to understand why someone would do that. I mean, it does sound a
little bit like you take it almost a little personally. If you're the chef and
you get that kind of order, what do you do? I go out and I try to convince one
of them, if not both, to change their orders completely. Because I, you know,
especially for Indian food, I want them to try lots of things. And I keep
telling them, you know, you can share, you know, if you're not allergic to
anything, you know, I would say try this and that. And I try to sell it. I try
very hard. Often I get a lot of pushback from some couples who like, no, we want
to eat exactly this, this combination. And then of course, I will happily make
it and serve it to them with respect. But I would try because it's just I want
them to have an exciting, you know, time trying new things. I hear what you're
saying, but I mean, I've got a problem, I'm going to confess something. I've got
a problem. It is food envy and the last minute swerve. So whatever I order on a
menu, I look at what the other person is eating and I think I've made the wrong
choice, you see. So my life might be a lot happier if I just order what the
person opposite me is ordering. You know, I'd be a happier, calmer person. Yes.
I mean, of course, you know, this is and I can see all the reaction, you know,
there. You don't need to take everything so seriously in life. It's just a meal.
But I just think that I would just be disappointed, especially if it was the US
president and his wife who came to my restaurant and ordered the identical
thali. I would I would be a bit deflated, to be honest, because I would want
them to try new things. OK, and what is what is the best thing that you can
offer right now tonight? I know you've been cooking up a storm. I would say the
paneer and the goat curry. Our goat curry is amazing. But if I mean, I would
really be upset if no one wanted to try that. OK. All right. We have been warned
and told. And now I'm very, very uncomfortably hungry. Asma Khan, thank you very
much indeed. Hello, I'm Andy Zaltzman and on this week's News Quiz I'm joined by
Simon Evans, Felicity Ward, Samira Ahmed and Alastair Beckett King. And as a new
Northern Ireland trade deal is struck, we will be frictionlessly exporting more
news stories than ever directly into your ears, cramming them full of Matt
Hancock's WhatsApp and Stormont breaks. But before that, some reading time. I've
got 100,000 WhatsApp messages to get through, each more exciting than the last.
That's the News Quiz tonight at 6.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Well, that's
coming up a bit later, but now the weather forecast with Ben Rich. Hello, Anita.
Thank you. Good evening. The weekend weather is looking relatively quiet. We're
going to have a lot of clouds to contend with. That cloud will produce the odd
shower, particularly on Sunday. And it is going to start to feel a little bit
chillier. But as we head into next week, a change to something more dramatically
cold, a colder spell of weather to come. In fact, it will be cold enough for
some of us to see some snow. But for the time being, things are relatively quiet
out there. We are going to see large amounts of cloud as we head through the
night. Best chance of some clear spells, I think, across parts of central and
western Scotland, parts of northwest England down into Wales. And if there are
clear spells for any length of time, we could see quite a sharp frost with lows
of minus three or minus four Celsius. But if it stays cloudy where you are,
well, temperatures are likely to remain above freezing. And then for tomorrow,
really, the weather is pretty similar wherever you are across the UK. Lots of
cloud in the forecast. That cloud producing some showers, I think, across
northern and eastern Scotland and down the eastern side of England. That's where
we have the greatest chance of seeing some showers through the day. Whereas
further west, parts of western Scotland, perhaps northern Ireland and parts of
Wales, that's where we have the best chance of seeing some sunshine.
Temperatures tomorrow, about where they have been today, between five and eight
degrees in most places. Now, as we head into Sunday, I think we'll see a few
more showers and some of those showers will start to turn wintry over high
ground in the north as some slightly colder air starts to work its way in. And
then into the start of the new week, we will see things turning much colder from
the north. We'll see some snow showers initially across parts of northern and
eastern Scotland, north-east England, some disruption, but there could be some
snow elsewhere as well. Ben, thank you. Today's studio director was Dafydd Evans
and the editor, Rebecca Keating. The 6 o'clock news is next. That's all from us
on PM.