TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 beginning on Saturday afternoon at 3. BBC News at 11 o'clock. The Home
Secretary, Swela Braverman, has insisted her plans for curbing small boat
crossings are fair, proportionate and necessary, after they were criticised by
the United Nations Refugee Agency. Braverman said the proposals, which
effectively ban anyone arriving illegally in the UK from returning, would see
the number of people crossing the Channel fall dramatically. But the UNHCR said
they were very concerning. Matt Saltmarsh is a spokesperson for the agency. From
what we've seen, it looks very much like an asylum ban. We're concerned about
the impact that that will have on refugees and asylum seekers. We're also
concerned about the impact that that will have as a signal to the rest of the
world in terms of the UK's role and its responsibilities. The BBC has said the
Match of the Day host Gary Lineker is being spoken to after he compared the
government's asylum plans to Nazi Germany. The former footballer tweeted that
the language used in setting out the plans was not dissimilar to that used in
Germany during the 1930s. The government said it was disappointed by the
comments. A weight loss jab that's injected weekly has been approved for use by
the NHS in England. Somaglutide makes people feel fuller so they eat less.
Patients will be able to take it for up to two years. The Met Office has
confirmed that last night was the coldest of the year so far. Temperatures at
Kinbrace in the Highlands dropped to below minus 15 Celsius overnight. A BBC
investigation has found that the number of dog attacks recorded by police in
England and Wales has risen by more than a third in the past five years. There
were nearly 22,000 cases of dogs causing injury last year compared with just
over 16,000 in 2018. The government has announced 600 million pounds of funding
to try to create equal sporting opportunities for girls. Schools in England will
be required to make sports available including football and deliver a minimum of
two hours of physical education per week. BBC News. We have comedy at half-past
here on Radio 4. Ginny and Vera go in search of literary inspiration but things
of course don't go entirely to plan. Gloomsbury, a rhapsody about bohemians is
in half an hour with a wonderful cast including Alison Stedman and Miriam
Margulies. This is BBC Radio 4 where we now continue the Shamima Begum story
presented by Josh Baker. I really thought the media had just forgotten about me.
I was all news. I was not important anymore. I really did not think anyone would
care. Our top story tonight is about a London teenager who's making the
headlines from Syria. The 19 year old is heavily pregnant and wants to raise her
child in the UK. Saying that she wasn't fazed by seeing beheaded heads in bins
and that she's got no regrets. No regrets but she wants to return to the UK.
It's February 2019. Shamima Begum has been found in a Syrian detention camp
where she's given an interview saying that she needs to come back to Britain.
She's nine months pregnant and desperate to protect her unborn child. Absolute
disgrace. Stay where she is. Her unborn child should be allowed to grow up here
but for her the grass is thick. But she's a British citizen whether people like
that or not that is a fact. Initially we all said that she was a victim. What's
changed is the last four years. You wouldn't have her back then? No, no, no, no,
definitely not. She should be done for treason. Yes. And she's a risk for this
country. Shamima Begum's been catapulted back into the media sparking a huge
debate about what to do with her. Now journalists are racing to get their
interview with her. I gave birth and while I was in the delivery room there was
a knock on the door and there were journalists who wanted to speak to me. You
know, just a whole other thing. How are you feeling? I just gave birth so I'm
really tired. Shamima Begum sits hunched to one side on a plastic chair. She's
dressed in all black with only her face on show. She looks exhausted. To her
right a woman presumably also an ISIS member holds her newborn baby. He's called
Jirar, named after her first son who died months earlier. You have obviously
been through a lot over the last years. Could you describe for us what it has
been like to live with and under Islamic State? At first it was nice. It was
like how they showed it in the videos. Like you come, you make family together.
Then afterwards things got harder. You know, when we lost Raqqa we had to keep
moving and moving and moving. She says we lost Raqqa. We. It's an interesting
way of phrasing it. It's like she still considers herself part of the group. Was
there a point where you started to have second thoughts? I realised I had to get
out for the sake of my children, the sake of my daughter and my baby. It was
only at the end but you didn't have any regrets up until that point? No. She
says she didn't have any regrets. One question that people are asking is whether
you can be rehabilitated? It would be really hard. Everything I've been through,
you know. I'm still kind of in the mentality of dola, you know, planes over my
head and having an emergency backpack and starving and all these things. It
would be a really big shock to go back to the UK. Shamima Begum is out of ISIS
territory for the first time in four years. But she says she's still thinking in
the mentality of dola, meaning the mentality of the so-called Islamic State,
where she says people are starving to death and planes are overhead. Presumably
a reference to the bombs that are being dropped to destroy the terror group.
More journalists arrive and she continues to give interviews. Underneath her
black abaya dress she cradles her 2-day-old son. Now she wants forgiveness.
She's asked about the ISIS-inspired attack at an Ariana Grande concert in
Manchester. 22 people were killed, including children. I was shocked but...
What? I just couldn't... I didn't know about the kids actually but... I do feel
that it's wrong that innocent people did get killed. It's a two-way thing
really. Because women and children are being killed back in the Islamic State
right now. And it's kind of retaliation. Their justification was that it was
retaliation. So I thought, OK, that is a fair justification. I still haven't
heard you apologise to anybody. OK, yeah, I am sorry for all the families that
have lost them. Husbands and sons and brothers. I'm sorry for all the men that
have lost their women and children because of the attacks back in the UK and
other countries. It wasn't fair on them. They weren't fighting anyone. They
weren't causing any harm. But neither was I and neither are the women who are
being killed right now back in Bahrus. You made some pretty inflammatory
statements about the Manchester Arena attack. Do you regret saying those things?
Of course I regret saying it, you know. What would you say to survivors of that
attack? I'm so sorry that you went through this. And I know it's awful. I'm
sorry that you went through this. I'm sorry that you went through this. And I
know it's for you. And if I could, I would spend the rest of my life trying to
persuade people not to do things like this, who may fall into things like this.
When Shamima Begum and her friends first went missing, the story in the media
was mostly about three vulnerable girls who'd been lured to ISIS. But after she
emerged from the so-called caliphate as a seemingly unrepentant ISIS member, the
story changed. What she said in those early interviews has come to shape how
Shamima Begum is often perceived as a terrorist. I want to understand why she
said the things she did. I'm Josh Baker. This is the Shamima Begum Story.
Episode 9. State of Mind. Some of the things that you said potentially changed
the way that you were perceived. From being this person that could come home, to
being somebody that has a lot of public anger towards you. How do you feel about
that? I don't think that's correct. I think even if I had said everything
correct, I had expressed my regret and disgust towards ISIS, and pleaded for
forgiveness, I still would have been seen as a monster. Why do you think,
regardless of what you've done, you would have been seen that way? Because ISIS
had committed a lot more atrocities since I had come, which fueled more anger in
people, because more attacks had happened in the UK. So there was just more
anger towards ISIS and anyone associated with ISIS. And I just was the target, I
guess. I wasn't in the right state of mind to speak to anyone, let alone do
interviews. Then all these journalists just coming to me, talking, asking all
these difficult questions, and accusing me of things. It annoyed me. It made me
angry. I felt very used by the journalists. Shamima Begum and I have spoken
about a lot of different things. But whenever we talk about the media and these
interviews, she always gets very frustrated. Now, she tells me, the public
doesn't understand the situation she was in when she gave these early
interviews, and the reasons behind her comments. I felt like an obligation to
say the things I did, an obligation to speak to them. I was just surrounded by
people I was afraid of. I'd heard stories about women who hurt other women if
they don't still support ISIS. I'd heard about another woman who had been
threatened just because she uncovered her face, not even said anything. The
woman had come to her and threatened to burn her tent down with her and her son
inside. And when I heard that story, I failed for my life and for my child's
life. And I thought to myself, I will stay low and keep my opinions to myself.
But I could not do that, obviously, because of the media. So, Shamima Begum says
she felt obliged to speak to the media, and that at first she feared denouncing
ISIS. She's right that Camp Hull, where she did these interviews, is a dangerous
place. I've been there a few times, and I know that women still loyal to ISIS do
persecute, torture and kill people they consider to be traitors. And it's
important to acknowledge that she'd been living in a war zone, watched two of
her children starve to death, and had just given birth. That's going to have an
impact on your state of mind. But as for her claim that she was used by
journalists, it's also important to remember there is a genuine public interest
in trying to find out who the person is that wants to come back to Britain. And
Shamima Begum could have refused to answer their questions. She chose to say
that she had no regrets, and that the Manchester bombing was retaliation. While
Shamima Begum gives interviews and the public anger grows, the British
government and the security services have been weighing up what to do with her,
and whether she poses a threat to the country. Shamima, hello. Take a seat.
Shamima Begum walks into another interview. She's clutching her baby, who's
wrapped in a grey blanket. Have you heard anything new about your case? No. I
only get information about my case every time a journalist comes to me. What was
the last information that you'd heard? That not everyone wants me to come back,
and it might take a bit of time for me to come back. But I'd come here with a
copy of the letter sent to her parents yesterday, stripping her of British
citizenship. Please find enclosed papers that relate to a decision taken by the
Home Secretary to deprive your daughter, Shamima Begum, of her British
citizenship. OK, then. What do you think? I don't know what to say. I don't know
why my case is any different to other people. Or is it just because I was on the
news four years ago? I feel like it's a bit unjust on me and my son. Yeah. But
you've done this to your son. I mean, this is the consequence of your actions.
Oh. I don't know what to say. Shamima Begum loses her citizenship on television,
and her reaction is recorded for the world to see. It's surreal to watch. My
priority as Home Secretary is to ensure the safety and the security of this
country. We cannot ignore the threat posed by those who chose to leave Britain
to engage with the conflict in Syria or Iraq. Speaking in Parliament in London,
the Home Secretary, who is charged with deciding what to do with Shamima Begum,
explains the government's position. Now that the so-called caliphate is
crumbling, some of them want to return. And I have been very clear, Mr Speaker,
where I can and where any threat remains, I will not hesitate to prevent this.
Mr Speaker, the House will have also seen the comments of Shamima Begum that
she's made in the media, and it will have to draw its own conclusions. Quite
simply, if you back terror, there must be consequences. Without British
citizens, there is no hope for the future of the country. Without British
citizenship, she can't return to the UK. She's stuck in Syria. What did you feel
when you found out? Just hopeless and depressed. And, like, I had... I just had
no hope of living anymore, you know, and I feared for my son and his life.
Shamima Begum is moved to a more secure camp in north-eastern Syria. After she
arrives, her newborn baby starts to get sick. After all the media attention, I
was brought to this camp. And then just one morning, I woke up and he was really
pale and his lips were blue and he was struggling to breathe. So I went to the
big hospital, you know, and... they just put an IV in him and put me in a room
with him, alone, away from everyone else, and just left me there, you know, with
the soldier, standing outside the door. He passed away maybe in the middle of
the night. I just realised he had stopped breathing, so I went to the nurse and
I just was completely numb and emotionless. I was like, I think my son is dead.
So she called the doctor and he tried to resuscitate him and it didn't work. So
they just left me in the room and I had to stay there all night with his body
because I couldn't be taken to the camp in the middle of the night. I had to
wait until morning to take him to get buried. Shemima Begum's newborn baby has
been buried in Syria after dying of pneumonia. The teenager who left London to
join the Islamic State... The teenager who left the UK to join so-called Islamic
State has died in a detention camp in Syria. I was escorted back into the camp
and I had to tell all the people in the camp what happened, but everyone already
knew because it was all over the media. It was just... It was difficult, you
know, having that... something so intimate for the world to know, not just the
women in the camp, but the world. Can you tell me how many times you were
pregnant? Five times. You were pregnant five times? Yeah. But you had three
kids? Yeah. I felt like I'd done more to save them, you know, like gotten them
out of this life in a way. I felt guilty for even bringing them into this world,
this horrible world, you know. Just over a month after the loss of her child,
rumours start to circulate that Shemima Begum might have played a significant
role in ISIS and that the government knows something about her that's not been
made public, and that's why they think she's a threat. Articles start to appear
with different claims about what she did for the group. The Mail on Sunday has
claimed that she was actually sewing people into suicide vests. The Sunday
Telegraph's got a story about her as well, saying Begum was an enforcer in
ISIL's morality police squad. They also say that she was able to carry a
klishnikov around with her. So, again, this is very different from the image of
the quiet sort of jihadi bride staying at home. One paper claims that
intelligence services have briefed the Prime Minister and the Home Secretary
that Shemima Begum was witnessed preparing suicide vests. Another article claims
that she was a cruel enforcer for the group's brutal morality police, called
Hizba. Apparently, a Syrian source saw Shemima Begum carrying a gun and shouting
at a woman for wearing bright shoes. There have been a number of allegations
made against you in the media. Can we go through them? Mm-hm. So, did you ever
help prepare suicide vests? No. Not at all? Not at all. Did you ever carry a
weapon? No. Did you ever fire a weapon? No. Did you receive any form of
training? No, not at all. Understanding what Shemima Begum did or didn't do and
how much of a threat she might pose is difficult. I spent well over a year
trying to piece together her life with ISIS. I know that one of her friends,
Amira, married a notorious commander who threatened to raise the ISIS flag above
Buckingham Palace and the White House. Another friend, Khadiza, married a man
who appeared in a video celebrating the decapitation of Christians. And her
husband, Yago, admitted to me he was a soldier of the Caliphate. So, she was
around some deadly people. Not to mention that I also discovered that she may
have been living with a man who managed weapons for the terror group. You've
told me that all you did in the so-called Caliphate was stay at home, really.
Mm. I think people will find that very hard to believe, especially when they
look at your circle of friends. I don't know how to explain it. Just because I'm
surrounded by these people with these opinions doesn't mean I have the same
opinions or have any impact on other people's opinions, you know? Like I said, I
just had a really controlling husband who never let me go outside. That should
not be hard to believe. I'm still looking into Shamima Begum's life with the
terror group. And recently, I've been speaking to women who were with ISIS and
lived in Raqqa at the same time as her. In a country I can't reveal, with a
contact I can't expose, I find myself in the back room of a hotel. In walks a
woman I'll call Um Khalid, who was once part of ISIS's notorious morality
police, Hizba. Yeah, Josh, you are from... British. Your accent's very British.
Um Khalid sits down in front of me. She's almost completely covered, and she
stares at me intensely. She claims she met Shamima Begum in Raqqa. We were in a
training camp. There were only girls, of course, so she didn't have her niqab
on. So that's when I saw her face. All the girls who join ISIS for the first
time are enlisted in this camp. Sometimes there would be religious groups, and
sometimes they introduced weapons training. They wanted to brainwash them with
religion to control them. So she says Shamima Begum received some training, and
there's a second time she claims she saw her in Raqqa. As part of Hizba, Um
Khalid had to enforce ISIS's strict rules. She tells me she was on a patrol in a
market, when she saw Shamima Begum standing with other members of Hizba. I was
passing by and I saw her standing with another patrol. I knew her from her eyes
and her voice, because in the market we are not allowed to remove the niqab. Was
Shamima part of Hizba? I did not ask her if she was part of Hizba or not. I
didn't ask her. So there's a woman in Hizba who says she saw you receiving some
training. No. When I first came, when I first crossed the border. At any point
during your time in ISIS? I mean, I'd like to specifically know when, so I can
say what I was doing instead. I suppose, well, OK, let me rephrase it. Any time
during your life in ISIS, were you given any form of either religious training
or weapons training? No. So you were not given any training? No. Were you given
any form of either religious training or weapons training? No. Nothing at all?
No. Were you ever a member of Hizba, ISIS's religious police? No. An enforcer
for their religious police? No. So Shamima Begum denies all the allegations. But
in another country, there's another former ISIS member who agrees to talk to me.
So it's just inside this little alley. Producer Sara and I meet her in downtown
Raqqa. As-salamu alaykum. Hello. Is it OK if I point the mic at you? Is that OK?
It's OK. Sara will translate. In a hot, sweaty room with the AC turned off for
the benefit of our microphone, we start to talk to a woman I'll call Umal Bara.
She says she saw Shamima Begum in an internet cafe towards the end of the so-
called caliphate. I saw her at the internet cafe. She seemed to be speaking to
somebody that's related to her. Yeah, she was speaking on the phone to somebody.
Do you know anything about her life, what her role was in the state or what she
did? No. No? What I know about her is that she wasn't a significant person
within the state. If she was significant, this person would stand out to us, but
she's not somebody who was important. How do you know she wasn't important? She
didn't have a presence. I mean, I saw her and nobody cared that she was around.
When we have somebody important in the Islamic State, people care, they talk
about it, they say, oh, did you see she was here? I mean, people would have
given her some form of, like, respect, but there was nothing. She was just like
any other person. Some people who are super important would have their husbands
waiting outside or they'd have a guard waiting for them outside. Really
important people don't mix with just everybody. I mean, you wouldn't think
twice. So she says Shamima Begum wasn't anyone important in ISIS, but that's not
to say she didn't have an impact. She tells me the arrival of Shamima Begum and
her friends to the so-called caliphate was talked about on the radio. Yes, ISIS
had its own radio station. And she says it was also mentioned during Friday
prayers at a mosque. And what were they saying about these women? It's a victory
for the state. They were used as an example to legitimise what was going on.
People would think, why would you join and come to an unstable place with
bombing? And then these girls come, and it's like, you see, we are a righteous
place. So it was a huge victory for the Islamic State. Like, look at who we got,
these girls that came from England. Umel Barra says that when Shamima Begum and
her friends first arrived, ISIS used their presence not only to inspire others
to join the group, but to legitimise the so-called caliphate. And this is backed
up by another ISIS member. We've spoken to people in ISIS who've told us that
when you and your friends arrived, it was celebrated on a radio station run by
ISIS. We've been told that your presence there was used by ISIS to inspire
others to join the group. I understand completely what you're saying, but ISIS
would not have even given us a second thought if the media had not made us more
than what we actually were, which was just three dumb teenagers, you know? But
regardless of the media coverage, like, you yourself, first-hand, understand the
impact and power of somebody travelling to ISIS, the impact that that has on
others. I feel like Shamima Begum is forgetting what she's previously told me,
that she only decided to join ISIS after her best friend, Sharmina, made it
there first and showed her it was possible. There is an impact of your actions
on others. Yeah. Do you recognise that? I understand what you mean, but it was
not our intentions, you know? It's not fair to, like, point the finger at us for
other people coming, you know, because I feel like they still would have come,
regardless of whether we came and regardless of whether we were on the news or
not. When it comes to understanding what Shamima Begum did or didn't do with
ISIS, whether she was a member of Hizbah or not, sowed suicide bombs or not, or
if she just largely stayed at home, as she says, it's important to remember
Shamima Begum was a member of a terror group and foreigners like her who joined
ISIS gave them support, strength and power, no matter what their role was. Some
believe it's a just punishment to leave Shamima Begum in Syria forever, stripped
of her British citizenship. But others disagree and want her brought back. Now
her lawyers are arguing that the government need to rethink the decision. It
could change the course of her future. As for Shamina, the person who convinced
her to come to Syria, she vanished, disappearing into the fog of war. So I'm
going to find out what happened to her. The Shamima Begum story is series two of
the investigative podcast, I'm Not a Monster, and is presented by Josh Baker,
who produced it with Sara Obedat and Joe Kent. And if you want to hear more,
Josh will be talking about this episode with Naga Manchetti over on Radio 5 Live
in a few minutes' time. The producer was Sara Obedat. This is BBC Radio 4 Now.
Will it be plain sailing for Ginny Fox and Vera Sackcloth-Vest when they head to
Venice? Comedy next with Gloomsbury. Now on BBC Radio 4, half an hour of comedy,
it's time for... The novelist Ginny Fox and her bosom chum, Vera Sackcloth-Vest,
have come in search of inspiration for Ginny's new book. But unfortunately, they
are accompanied by their husbands. The bells, the bells of Venice striking
midnight. Is that the bell of San Giorgio, Lionel? How on earth should I know? I
wonder, I wonder. It may be the frari of Madonna dell'Orto, ting, ting, ting.
San Giorgio Maggiore, tang, tang, tang, tang. And of course the deep booming
call of San Marco, thundering over the city, making every stone vibrate, bong,
bong, bong, bong. Ginny, please, I've got a bit of a headache. Oh, really,
Lionel? You're no fun at all. I just need to sleep. Pass the aspirin tablets.
Well, I couldn't possibly sleep. I'm in the exhilaration of being in Venice. I'm
sure I'll find the inspiration I need for my new book. Why couldn't you find
inspiration in Tavistock Square? Oh, Lionel, don't be so prosaic. Isn't this
wonderful, to lie in bed with the sounds of the canal below our window? There's
an awful smell, and surely a room at the back would have been cheaper. This trip
is my treat, Lionel. I'm paying. But with what? We're broke. It's all right for
Henry and Vera. They've bought a palatial suite at the Grotty Palace Hotel. Yes,
her mother's very generous, although, of course, half mad. And I suppose Vera
must make a fortune from her writing. Yes, yes, but she writes pot-boilers
rarely, doesn't she? Without any true literary merit. But what you're publishing
is avant-garde poetry, Lionel. Literature. Can we shut the window? The smell is
making me feel quite nauseous. If Venice is so loathsome to you, why did you
insist on coming? I just feel I should be here to protect you, Ginny. Vera and I
are perfectly capable of managing on our own. She has a right hook that would
fell any man in Europe, which is just as well, because poor Henry couldn't kill
a fly. Oh, God, there's another one. I'm going to get it. I'll switch the light
on. Oh, must you chase every mosquito in Venice around the room, Henry? Wait,
wait. There it is. Oh, mist. Dash it. Where's the little blighter gone? Ah,
there it is. Take that. Oh, my God. Henry, you fool. Damn, damn, damn. What was
it? A little china figurine of a satyr with panpipes. Oh, God, God, what shall
we do? It's smashed beyond repair. I'll smuggle it out in my bag tomorrow and
throw it in the canal. I'll come back to burn it. But it might have been
valuable. Don't be absurd, Henry. Not even the grotty palace would have valuable
artefacts in their hotel rooms. People might steal them. Very well. I'll switch
the light off. All right. Oh, no. They might think we've stolen it. We'll just
have to admit we've broken it and find something similar to put in its place.
No, no. Never admit anything. First rule of diplomacy. Please, Henry. I want to
see that Bellini Madonna tomorrow, the one that made Henry James come over
queer. I must get some sleep. There's another one. Switch the light on. Oh,
dear. Oh, God, I think I'm developing tennis elbow. I know the Café Florian is a
Venetian institution, but I wish their repertoire was a little less hackneyed. I
hate Strauss-Waltzes. Infernal racket! Yes, Strauss-Waltzes always make me feel
seasick. Um, Henry, just before Ginny and Vera come back, I have, uh, uh, uh, a
little... a little... a little... a little favour to ask, but you must keep it
secret. Oh, sounds intriguing. No, no, no, no. It's just, well, you've heard of
Peggy Guglheim. American, awfully rich. Her family have made millions in mining
and smelting. How frightfully vulgar of them. Yes, but she's an enthusiastic
patron of the arts. Would you mind... I know this is asking an enormous favour,
but would you mind... I know it's a frightful cheer, but... Would I mind what?
Oh, dear, I'm sorry. Asking favours makes me feel so... so... so jittery. Oh,
dear, I feel faint. I'm going to faint. Wait. No. No, I'm not. Sorry. Sorry.
Good heavens, man, get a grip. I'm so sorry. My head's swimming. I'm useless at
asking favours. Well, imagine you're somebody else, then. Who? Somebody bold,
confident, assertive. I know. Imagine you're Vera. Imagine I'm Vera. Look here,
Henry, I want you to ask Peggy Guggelheim to invest in my printing press.
Certainly, darling. Don't call me darling, Henry. People might think they're
only getting into the part, old boy. Of course I'll ask Peggy to invest in your
press. Oh, thank you, Henry. You could visit her with Vera. Americans love
aristocrats. I suppose so. I'll just have to hope that Vera doesn't start
fascinating her. Oh, I've heard that Peggy's not that way inclined. Whatever you
do, don't tell Ginny I'm seeking investment. She would find it dreadfully
vulgar. Mum's the word, then. Oh, here they come. Well, the ladies' room leaves
a lot to be desired. But now I want to wander through the streets in search of
inspiration. And I want to see my Bellini Madonna. Come on, Henry, get the bill.
This is on us, Llanel. Are you sure? This place is so frightfully expensive.
Don't worry. Mummy's paying for Henry and me to come on this trip. I wish my
mother would pay for us to come to Venice. Be quiet, Llanel. Stop driveling on
about money all the time. Now, let's go our separate ways and meet up for supper
at Guido's Ristorante. I hope we don't get lost. Of course we'll get lost,
Llanel, you idiot. Wonderfully romantically lost. That's the point of Venice.
Well, I'm not going in a gondola, whatever you say. You... You're driving me
crazy. You see, isn't it marvellous, Llanel? The Rialto. One almost expects to
see Shylock advancing towards us in his gabardine. Isn't that Dave? Who? Dave,
D.H. Lollipop, with that blonde woman over there by the mask shop. Good heavens!
So it is. Quick, let's go the other way. Ginny! Pretend we haven't seen them.
Llanel! It's no good, Ginny. They know we've seen them. You are absolutely
infuriating. Dave! What a delightful surprise. I had no idea you were in Venice.
Ginny, you're looking champion. I don't think you've met my wife, Frida. Frida,
this is Mr. and Mrs. Fox, Llanel and Ginny. Good morning. Please don't be
frightened of my bosoms. I am wearing a new brassiere made by Crookes, and it
has given my breasts a frightening air. Frida's famous across Europe for her
bosoms. Indeed, they have given my breasts names, Vesuvius and Krakatoa. Do you
have a pet name for your bosoms, Mrs. Fox? What an extraordinary idea. You could
call them Norfolk and Suffolk. What, Llanel? Norfolk and Suffolk? What do you
mean by that? Nothing. Ginny! Oh, no. You meant something by it. And I know what
you're implying. I'm not implying anything. Oh, yes, you are. Frida was only...
Do you know what that Noel Card character says? Awfully flat, Norfolk. So you're
making a cruel reference to my being flat-chested, Llanel. Please, Ginny, calm
down. I assure you, Ginny, nothing was further from my mind. In any case, big
bosoms are a burden and a danger to traffic. In Bavaria once, I turned around
and knocked a policeman off his bicycle. I am so envious of your being flat-
chested. I'm not flat-chested. Of course not. But if you were... Stop looking at
my bosom, Dave. I'm sorry, but it was... As for you, Llanel, your company has
become odious to me. And I don't want to set eyes on you again until dusk. Don't
worry. I will take Llanel and look after him. No, thank you. You will come with
me, Llanel, now. I am taking you out in a gondola. No. Yeah, and you shall read
me poetry by Lord Byron. Oh, dear. Now, Ginny, I want to have a word with you.
Oh, dear. That sounds ominous. That money I lent you, any chance you could pay
it back? I'm absolutely broke. Oh, Dave, I'm so sorry. I'm absolutely broke,
too. But I lent you 45 pounds, 11 shillings and 9 pence. And it wasn't even my
money. It was Frieda's. Oh, Dave, I'm so terribly, terribly sorry. I used it to
book this trip. But don't tell Llanel. Oh, come off the creek, then, good and
proper. It's the devil's own job to sell you books if the police keep seizing
them. There must be somebody in Venice who could help. A rich patron? Well, I'm
going to show my paintings to Peggy Gugelheim. Good heavens, Dave. I didn't know
you painted. Oh, yes. Now, if Peggy takes a fancy to them and buys a few,
that'll take the pressure off, and I can stop pestering you for a while. Would
you like to see some of my paintings? Well, er, yes, of course. Although,
perhaps some other... It's only five minutes down that alleyway. I'd value your
opinion. Well, well, yes. I suppose I can spare five minutes. Look here, Henry.
Once we've seen this Peggy Gugelheim, I want to go and look for my Bellini. But
we still haven't found a replacement figurine. I'm sick to death of you and your
precious figurine. And I'm sick of Llanel, too. Why hasn't he got the guts to
ask her himself? Well, you know how Americans love aristocrats. Oh, all right. I
suppose I'll have to switch on the charm, then. No, not the charm, Vera. We
don't want you fascinating the wretched woman. We want her attention on Llanel
and his deserving cause for once. Just rein in your charisma and don't say
anything too interesting. What a charming salon, Miss Gugelheim. Wonderful works
of art. Yes, quite delightful. Art is my raison d'etre. And sex, of course.
Well, we're here on behalf of some friends who run a small printing press. What
sort of things do they publish? Oh, avant-garde things, mostly. Modern poems.
They were wondering if you would consider investing in their press. Tell them if
they're struggling, they should publish a novel with plenty of sex and violence
in it. Excuse me, Miss Gugelheim. There is a phone call. Oh, right. That'll be
Antonio. Excuse me for a moment. Vera, look. She's got one. One what? That
figurine of Pan over there on the chiffoniere. It's exactly the same as the one
I smashed. Oh, yes. It does look similar. Are you suggesting I pop it in my
handbag? Don't be silly, darling. I'll just have a closer look. Don't touch it,
Henry. You might drop that one, too. Leave it. It's Meissen. It's the same mark
as the other one. It's identical. Oh, you're admiring my figurines. Yes. This
one, for example. I do love satyrs. Is it, um, valuable, this piece? Oh, yeah.
Eighteenth-century Meissen, very rare. Oh, dear. How disappointing. Aw, cheer
up, Henry. Isn't it cute? Vera the way his moustache drips when he's
disappointed. Yes. Like a bored terrier when the rat escapes. There's so much to
see in Venice. Have you been up the Campanile? Do you know? I don't think I ever
have. Oh, you must go. You'd adore it, Henry. Yes, I hear the views are
stupendous. Oh, you want to go, too, Vera? Thank you. No, I don't have a head
for heights. Poor Vera. She won't even go up in an aeroplane. I really just want
to see paintings, particularly the Bellini Madonna at San Zacharias. Oh, but
that's just a harpoon of step from the Piazza San Marco. Really? I thought it
was further. No, no, no. Right next door. You just go down the Calle Canonica,
then a left, a right, a left again, second right, another left, then over two
bridges, a right, a right, a third on the left, you're there. Couldn't be
easier. That sounds a trifle. And while you're admiring the Bellini, I can take
Henry up the Campanile. I take all my guests up the Campanile, and I can assure
you, Henry, it's an experience you will never forget. I'm burning like a flame,
dear I'll never be the same, dear I'll always play such a... Oh, Lionel, this is
truly wunderbar. I'm not a very good sailor, I'm afraid. This is not a sailing
ship. It is only a gondola. You know, I feel the shadow of Lord Byron hovering
over us. Read some more in your marvellous English accent. Um, the soft waves,
once all musical to song, that heaved beneath the moonlight with the throng of
gondolers... Excuse me. I'm going to be... Schopenhauer, Schopenhauer, Hegel,
Nietzsche, Nietzsche, Hegel, Kemp, Kemp... I'm so sorry. Oh, Lionel, you vomit
so beautifully in German. I thought everybody had to vomit in German. Have a
toto brändi. Thank you. That's better. Well, might this be a convenient moment
to ask if you'd like to invest in a small avant-garde publishing company? Mostly
painting oils, of course. What do you think, Ginny? But there are dozens. I had
no idea you were so prolific with your brush, Dave. My mind's thronged with
images, Ginny. Writhing figures, breasts, buttocks, sinews. I grab my brush at
every opportunity. You wouldn't like to pose for me, would you? What? Pose?
Naked? Yes, of course, naked. Take that frock off, let your hair down, and I'll
dash off a few sketches. Oh, no, Dave, I'm sorry. I couldn't possibly. Don't
worry, I won't take advantage. I'm only interested in the way the light bounces
off your buttocks and breasts. Besides, I'm always impotent and thirsty. No, no,
really, Dave, I'm terribly shy. Well, up on its time to throw off your
inhibitions. I'll get my kit off, too. I'm not proud. We'll be on equal terms,
naked artist and naked model, total liberation. Dave, Dave, stop! Put your
trousers back on, or I shall leave at once. Oh, all right. Will you do me
another favour instead? Anything. Come along to Peggy Gugelheim's with me
tomorrow and put in a good word for me paintings. After all, if we can get her
to part with a few hundred dollars, we're in clover. Oh, I'll tell her I think
they have a primitive bravura. That's the spirit! And you never know, you might
find inspiration there. A rich American in Venice, the collision of decaying
antiquity with brash new world vulgarity. Oh, yes! Actually, Ginny, you can't
use that theme. I'm going to have a crack at that one myself. Now, Henry, I have
a confession to make. A confession? I only offered to escort you up that
Campanile so I could get you on your own. What? Don't look so scared, you're so
incredibly cute. Cute? Uh-huh. Now, all my lovers have to start out by kissing
me on the Piazza San Marco. Come on! Kiss you? No, no, no, I'm so sorry, I
can't. It's just, my wife... Oh, enough already with the wife. I know all about
you English bohemians. Come on, pucker up. No, I'm so sorry, I'm so sorry, but
the fact is, I'm a homosexual. Pardon me? I'm a homosexual! Oh, yeah? With your
beautiful wife and your two sons? Like hell you are. Kiss me, Henry! I can't
enter into an extramarital relationship with you. I'm so sorry. Okay, we won't
enter into a relationship, but kiss me just for the hell of it. I've always
wanted to kiss an English aristocrat. But I'm not really an aristocrat. A
diplomat. In fact, to be strictly accurate, I'm an ex-diplomat. Oh, a
homosexual. Well, I'm not really a full-time homosexual. Kiss me, Henry, I'll
give you anything in return. Anything? Anything. What about that little Meissen
figurine of the god Pan? The figurine? Whoa, you drive a hard bargain, buddy.
Okay, you can have the figurine if you kiss me, and keep kissing me while the
clock strikes twelve. Couldn't we wait until after lunch? Come here! Mmm! I
tease for you, make everything easy. Oh, the siesta is such a civilized
institution, isn't it, Henry? Henry, are you all right? Come and have a lovely
little siesta. Don't hide behind the newspaper. Come on, darling. Very well,
darling. What's the matter, Henry? Your lips look bruised, darling. Are you all
right? I've got something to tell you, darling. What? Peggy Guggelheim kissed
me. What?! I had to, she grabbed me. I'm so sorry. You had to kiss her? What on
earth do you mean? I'm so sorry, darling. I told her I was homosexual, but it
didn't make a blind bit of difference. But why? Why did you put up with it? She
said if I kissed her, I could have the little Meissen figurine of the god Pan.
Where is it, then? I've got to go back to her place and collect it tomorrow.
Tomorrow?! God knows what'll happen then. I had half expected you to become a
little infatuated with the sinuous gondolier, but a nouveau riche Jewish-
American with terrible earrings rarely. Oh, you must come with me, darling. I'm
a chaperone. I wouldn't set foot in that ballet woman's precious palazzo for a
king's ransom. Oh, please, darling, don't leave me alone with her. No! If you
won't come, I'll have to take Lionel with me. But don't, she might take a fancy
to him. Or proposition both of us. Oh, my God, I must have a drink of water. I'm
so sorry, darling, please forgive me. No! I'm extremely displeased with you,
Henry. You're always nagging me about fascinating people, and the minute I let
you out of my sight, you're kissing an American in broad daylight. I'm sorry to
have to inform you that you're sleeping on the balcony tonight, and there are
even more mosquitoes out there. Oh, no. You left me sad and lonely Why did you
leave me lonely? Come in. Miss Guggeleheim. Mr Lollipop. Please, call me Dave.
May I introduce Mrs Ginny Fox? How do you do? Ginny Fox, oh, yes, Ginny Fox.
Henry Mickleton asked me to invest in your avant-garde press. You're in need of
extra bucks. Henry asked you for money on our behalf? I'm astonished. About my
paintings. Dave, did you know about this? First I've heard of it, Ginny. I just
came to show Peggy my paintings. How about this one? No, not surreal enough. But
I'm furious that anyone should ask for money on our behalf. Oh, you don't need
any then. Mind your own damn business. Ginny, please. We're trying to show Peggy
my paintings. Mrs Fox thinks my paintings have a primitive bravura. Primitive
bravura is so old-fashioned. No, no. Primitive bravura is coming back in. Not
into my collection it isn't. Well, I'd just like to make it absolutely clear
that Lionel and I do not need money from anybody, least of all Americans. I came
to Venice for inspiration, not for what I believe is vulgarly known in your
country as big bucks. Okay, fine. You made your point. Now will you please get
the hell out of here? It'll be a pleasure. Come along, Dave. Butch! I've wasted
enough time here already. Oh, if Henry's in the ante room, tell him to wait a
couple of minutes. I've got to put on some Max Factor's lip pomade and drench
myself in Shalimar. Henry's in the ante room? Right. Henry, I've got a boat to
pick with you. How dare you ask Piggy Gugelheim for money on our behalf? Lionel
told me to. Lionel? What on earth were you dreaming of? It was just... I've
never been so humiliated in my life. The woman's a monster with no intellectual
refinement. She's dead from the neck up. Well, she's certainly not dead from the
neck down. Aye, Henry, you're right there, lad. All her blood energy has gone
down into the vital organs, feeding her sensual appetites, driving her lexodus
passions down, down, anchoring her consciousness in the rich swamp of the
erotic. And I as good as told her so. But I thought you liked that sort of
thing. Nay, nay, lad. She's a man-eater. I had to fight her off. You want to
watch out, Henry. She's tarting herself up for you. Oh, no. Lionel, you mustn't
leave me alone with her for a moment. You'd better not tell her who you are,
Lionel. Who I am? Why not? Who am I? She and I have just had a flaming row.
What? Oh, God. Henry, are you out there? Yes. Well, come on in. I'm ready and
waiting. Coming. Don't tell her who I am, Henry. Oh, dear, I feel sick. Henry,
darling. Oh, who the hell is this? This is... This is, um, Leonardo Volpo, a
friend. Leonardo, this is Miss Piggy... Sorry, Miss Peggy Guglheim. Enchanté,
Leonardo. Enchanté as well. I know why you brought Leonardo, Henry. Well,
Leonardo's always wanted to meet you. Bullshit! You told me in the piazza that
you were a part-time homosexual. Leonardo's your boyfriend, right? Leonardo, my
boyfriend? Oh, yes, that's right, yes, of course. Henry! She's brought your
boyfriend along as a chaperone. Ha! Ha! Got to hand it to you. You've got
chutzpah. And does your wife know? Oh, no, no. She, uh, turns a blind eye to
anything of that sort. So she's never met Leonardo? No, no. Leonardo and I only
spend time together in foreign cities or at a certain club in Soho. Henry, I
must protest. Oh, calm down, Leonardo. I'm sure we can trust Peggy with our
little secret, darling. Darling? Henry, if it's not too much trouble, could I
possibly just collect the figurine and, um, well, I'm afraid I have another
urgent appointment. OK, OK, I know when I'm beaten. I'm kind of sad to part with
this little figurine. Think of me whenever you fondle it, Henry. Well, I very
rarely fondle my figurines, but thank you. All right, what's going on? Ah, Mrs.
Mickelton, good morning. I know something's going on. You can bet your sweet
life something's going on, sister. I beg your pardon? May I introduce you to
Leonardo Valpo, Henry's little secret? W-What? Oh, you didn't know? Leonardo is
Henry's boyfriend. They meet in foreign cities and a certain club in Soho. No!
Vera, darling... Don't darling me, darling. How could you? Carrying on for years
and years as if butter would melt in your mouth. Take that! Oh! Oh, no, no! It's
smashed! You've smashed the figurine! Vera, you idiot! Don't you dare call me an
idiot! Although I certainly have been an idiot to put up with your antics for so
long. The figurine! The figurine! Don't get upset, Henry. It's not real my son.
It's a cheap reproduction made in Birmingham. You don't think I'd part with a
real mice and figurine just for a kiss off you, do you? Now get up and get the
hell out of my palazzo! You... You're driving me crazy. What a relief to be back
on British rolling stock. What time do we get to Victoria, Lionel? Um, half
past, I think. What an utter disaster that trip was. I didn't get a scintilla of
inspiration in Venice. With Dave fussing all the time about his awful paintings.
I believe in the end he resorted to selling them on the Rialto. Poor Dave. Money
worries are no joke. It's all right for Vera churning out her pot boilers. Of
course, one doesn't need inspiration for that sort of novel. Shh! They're coming
back. Vera! Henry! How was your luncheon? Excellent. Roast beef. I'm so sorry
you didn't feel up to joining us. I hate eating in public. I can't wait to be
back in my own dining room enjoying one of Lionel's sausage rolls. I didn't know
you did sausage rolls, Lionel. Only about once a month. We were just saying how
awful Venice was. The smell was awful. Dave's awful German wife was awful. The
gondola was awful beyond words. Yes, and that frightful Guggenheim woman
creating misunderstandings. I'm sorry I had to knock you down, darling. Oh,
please, darling, think nothing of it. And at least the hotel's little figurine
wasn't genuine Meissen, either. Oh? What a relief. But in general, Venice seemed
shadowy, deathly, an atmosphere of decay. It was a complete waste of Dave's
loan. What? You borrowed money from D.H. Lollipop? Yes, yes, only a trifling
sum. Oh, do stop fussing, Lionel. I will not discuss money on a train. How much?
£45, 11 shillings and 9 pence, if you must know. As much as that? Oh, God, oh,
God, oh, God, what are we going to do? Oh, Vera? Yes, Lionel? Is there any
chance, er, would you consider, might we be fortunate enough to be permitted to
publish one of your wonderful novels? Oh, yes, Vera, you're marvellous. Utterly
marvellous. Novels? A kind of you to offer. By all means, let's talk about it.
What kind of advance did you have in mind? Oh... You have been listening to
Gloomsbury by Sue Lim. Vera Sackloff Vest was played by Miriam Margulies, Ginny
Fox and Italian Maid by Alison Steadman, Henry Mickleton, Jonathan Coy, Lionel
Fox, Nigel Planer, Peggy Guglheim and Frieda Lollipop from Orwenna Banks, D.H.
Lollipop, John Sessions. The producer was Jamie Ricks. Gloomsbury is a Little
Brother production for BBC Radio 4. The stream you are currently listening to
will stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart
speaker and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're
listening on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.
If it's something you've noticed, please do send your questions or comments to
moneyboxx.bbc.co.uk.