TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC World Service, the world's radio station. On the fifth floor today is the
first anniversary of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Our BBC Russian
journalists tell us what was going through their minds in the first days after
the war started. I'd compare the start of the war with the loss of some close
relative, I'd say. You can think that you are prepared to some events, but when
the news strikes you, there is a tsunami of emotions. Our Russian team in Moscow
had to pack up and move to Riga, the capital of Latvia, to continue their work.
When we were talking with my parents, I said that, well, consider this as
another deployment. We don't know for how long. I don't know whether it was a
good idea or a bad one, because I'm still probably in denial of the fact that
maybe I won't be able to come back to Russia anytime at all. Join us on the
fifth floor from Riga after the latest BBC News. Hello, I'm David Harper with
the BBC News. Russia is facing another round of Western sanctions a year after
the invasion of Ukraine began. The European Union announced a tenth round of
measures shortly after the United States and others imposed further restrictions
on more Russian individuals and businesses. Grant Ferrett reports. The measures
agreed by EU member states include tighter restrictions on dual-use technology
as well as steps against those spreading propaganda in support of Moscow. The
announcement had been delayed for several days by Poland, which had complained
that the later sanctions were too weak. Lithuania has also voiced reservations.
The US, Canada and Britain have imposed their own measures. In addition, leaders
of the G7 group of richest economies have warned they'll punish any countries
that help Russia evade sanctions. But Western governments know that although 12
months of sanctions have hit Russia's economy hard, they have not prevented it
from continuing its war in Ukraine. Restrictions on the movement of vehicles are
in place in Nigeria, where elections begin in a few hours. There are three main
candidates to replace President Mohammedu Buhari, who has completed the maximum
two terms. Anne Busby reports. The election comes at a time of heightened
insecurity in Nigeria and there has been violence in the run-up to the vote. On
Wednesday, a senatorial candidate in the southeast and two of his colleagues
were shot dead. Travel restrictions came into force at midnight local time. Land
borders are shut and soldiers have been patrolling key areas. This election is
the most unpredictable in years, with a third candidate, Peter Obie, seen as a
credible challenger to those of the two main parties. The number of people
killed in the catastrophic earthquakes that hit Turkey and northern Syria this
month has passed 50,000. Most are in Turkey. Its disaster management agency,
says the number of dead there, has risen to over 44,000. Anthony Albanese will
shortly become the first serving Australian Prime Minister to march in the gay
and lesbian Mardi Gras in Sydney, one of the world's largest such events. But
his presence has attracted criticism, as Phil Mercer reports. Anthony Albanese
has attended Sydney's Mardi Gras before as an opposition MP. But as a sitting
Prime Minister, he's making history by marching in one of the world's largest
LGBTQI events that could attract up to 300,000 spectators. He said he was
committed to removing inequality based on sexuality or identity. But critics
insist Mr Albanese is pandering to a small minority that's hijacking Australia's
social agenda. Police in Tunisia have arrested another critic of President Khais
Saeed, the latest to be detained as a lawyer, Khazi Shaharshi, who previously
led a political party. He discovered that he was wanted when he went to see
clients who face charges of conspiring against state security. You're listening
to the latest world news from the BBC. President Biden has defended his
administration's response to a train derailment in the state of Ohio, which
caused a major chemical spill and a political row. The crash three weeks ago
prompted the evacuation of the turn of East Palestine. Mr Biden had been
criticised for not visiting the site when finding time to go to Ukraine. But the
president told reporters that members of his team were there within two hours of
the crash. He said he was in touch with local officials and monitoring events
closely. A first group of suspected gang members in El Salvador has been moved
to a huge new prison that is the centrepiece of President Naib Bukele's self-
declared war on crime. This report from Viv Marsh. In a video tweeted by the
president, a stream of heavily tattooed men, shackled barefoot and wearing only
shorts, are shown being driven to the jail and forced down onto the floor with
their humps behind their shaven heads. They're the first 2,000 of unexpected
40,000 inmates rounded up in El Salvador under a state of emergency after a
spike in violent crime. The Justice and Security Minister said the government
was eliminating a cancer from society. Rights groups and observers say the
prison cells are already overcrowded and violate incarceration standards. Floods
and landslides in south-eastern Brazil are now known to have killed at least 54
people, with about 30 still missing. Most of those killed were in and around the
coastal town of São Sebastiao in São Paulo State, where more than a month's
worth of rain fell in 24 hours last weekend. It's snowing in southern
California, with the Los Angeles area braced for its first blizzard since 1989.
Snowflakes and sleets swirled around the Hollywood sign in the mountains behind
Los Angeles. The main north-south highway, Interstate 5, was closed through the
Tahon Pass or Grapevine. Forecasters have warned there could be flash flooding
and landslides on the coast. That's the latest BBC News. Hello and welcome to
the fifth floor with me, Farinac Amidi. This week, we've come to the Latvian
capital, Riga, to meet the BBC Russian journalists who used to be based in
Moscow. They had to leave shortly after the invasion of Ukraine, as they were
unable to continue to report the war because of Russian government restrictions.
And we'll be finding out what that move meant both personally and
professionally. That's to come in a moment, but first a catch-up with news
editor Sergei Zakkin. So, Sergei, as the anniversary was approaching, were you
expecting big news? To be perfectly frank, we didn't quite know what to expect.
Logically, when the anniversary of some sort of big date in a military conflict
approaches, it's logical to expect some kind of intensified fighting and so on,
but then we know that Russia has been trying to intensify fighting. For a while
now, and it hasn't quite worked so far. There was a lot of expectation around
Putin's address to the nation, which happened earlier this week. Other than
that, it's generally quite difficult to approach and to comprehend the
anniversary of such an awful war that is still going on, when you realise that
it's mostly a milestone, but you have no idea how many anniversaries we're going
to mark before this war is going to end. Sergei, how did you mark this
anniversary with your coverage in BBC Russian? Obviously, you can't ignore the
fact that now it's a year since the war started. All you can do really is to
look back, to show most important moments, to talk about most important lessons.
I think the most important outcome of the war so far is destroyed lives and
destroyed cities. And lives, obviously, of most people in Ukraine and many
people in Russia being totally completely upside down. This week was an
opportunity for us just to remind our audience of this. I just want to know, you
know, you've all had to move from Moscow to Riga and this speech of Putin, what
did it make you feel about the future of your team? Putin's speech, I think,
made us realise that we might be here for a long time to come. What was striking
this time, in this speech, it didn't say anything about the goals of this war or
a possible time scale. It sounded that the war would become part of life for
Russians and he was also warning the best that he wasn't going to back up. And I
think this was the most striking impression. Thank you, Sergey. That was editor
Sergey Zakin. Now, let's dig a bit deeper into the question of why BBC Russian
are here in Riga. I'm with bureau chief Andrei Gorjanov. Thanks for being with
us, Andrei. So why did you decide to move to Riga? Thanks for having me. Before
the war started, we had a strange feeling in the air that the BBC Russian is not
going to work for Berlin, Russia. Russian state was changing from a strange
democracy, but something could call a normal country to something very
different. And we didn't understand what that was. So we had a very good
contingency plan. What do we do if ABC happens? We never planned for such an
event as a war. But of course, when the city couldn't continue working in
Moscow, we would move to some other place. And Riga seemed like a very good
option from the very beginning because it's a bordering country, because it's an
EU country, because it's NATO, and it has a lot of Russian speaking population.
As you mentioned, you were thinking about this for a while, that you might have
to move away from Moscow. What was the last straw? When the war started on the
24th of February, it was very, very clear that we would not be able to continue
working. But we stayed for a couple of days, investigated what's happening. But
very fast, Russian state decided to introduce many laws, which made journalism
freedom of speech and freedom of expression impossible. And calling a war, a war
became a crime. So if you want to be a BBC journalist, you would not be able to
comply with the Russian laws. And therefore puts you at a huge risk of staying
inside Russia. And how do you feel about the work you're doing at the moment?
Well, BBC's Russian service has a very good team of people. And in the course of
war, it showed how people support each other, how they value their atmosphere
within the team, and how they try to help each other. And that's absolutely
precious. Thank you, Andrei. Andrey Gorianov, Bureau Chief of BBC Russian here
in Riga. Now, earlier this week, I spoke with some other colleagues from the BBC
Russian team to hear how their lives have changed over the past year. I was
joined by Sieva Boyko, Liza Forgt, and Sergei Goriyashko. First, Liza told me
where she was when she first heard about the outbreak of war. I'm not an early
bird. It's really difficult for me to wake up early. But this morning, for some
reason, I woke up in the middle of the night when I was 4.30, or like 5 a.m. I
took my phone and I saw those pop-up messages that Russia invaded Ukraine and
many, many cities like Kiev and other cities there under attack. And I was like,
am I dreaming? What is going on? But then you realize very quickly that you're
not dreaming, that it's reality. My husband, who's also a journalist, he woke up
too, and we were just like there for a second. 10 minutes later, we were in
front of our laptops working. Of course, we were overwhelmed with work, so
focused that you didn't really have time to reflect for a while. And of course,
little did we know that in less than three weeks, we're going to live in another
country. So Sergei, what about you? Where were you? In my case, I actually woke
up from a phone call. It was my editor, Andrei, who called me with the worst
line I've ever heard in my life on the phone. Get up. It's the war. I was in
Moscow. I was actually with my partner. So we woke up. I started to write the
news about the invasion. Of course, it was absolutely astonishing. Nobody, I
think, experienced such a thing in our lives. So of course, we could imagine
this happening late February when it was already very tense. Still, even on the
20th, 21st, I thought that if it's going to be any kind of war, it will be
really local, taking parts only of Donetsk and Luhansk regions, where it has
already been for more than eight years. But on the 24th, we realized that we
were mistaken. I actually still do remember these days, minute by minute. Mm.
Seva, what about you? I'd compare the start of the war with the loss of some
close relative, I'd say. You can think that you are prepared to some events. But
when the news strikes you, there is a tsunami of emotions. Usually, the only way
to live through it is to work. So I do not remember, I think, the first five
days. I was just working constantly. I was just mechanically recording shiraj
dispatches for our podcast, editing the voices of Ukrainians who were being
infected by the war, and so on and so forth. Just in a few days, I remember that
I had a panic attack when Russians started bombing Kharkiv. I was in a taxi
trying to get from home to the work, and scrolling through the news, I saw this
image of a huge shell of a Russian missile, which stuck in the middle of a road
in Kharkiv. And I was like, what the hell is going on? How we, again, can see
shells in this particular city? Which was occupied by Germans during the Second
World War, so I was almost knocked down by this particular image. I actually
remember that one vividly. Russian shells standing in the intersection in the
city was a very common image at the time. And the worst thing about it was the
evenings when you stopped working, and you just could go into your head and feel
all those emotions. And I would call my mom, and we would cry together. And this
horrible sense of shame and guilt and horror that sort of owns you completely,
that is horrible. But the most horrible thing, of course, was watching how
people in another country, that's very close to Russia, how they suffer. And of
course, we all have many friends and colleagues in Ukraine, and just thinking
about what they have to go through, and that your country, because of course, we
were all like BBC journalists, but we were also Russians. We were born in
Russia, we grew up in Russia, and just knowing that your country, the country,
your motherland, if you can say so, does these horrible things. And so many
people have to suffer because of that. That was a sense of guilt, a little. Not
a little. It's huge, and it doesn't stop. I mean, that was something that you
would get overwhelmed with. It's interesting, you know, that announcement of
invasion changed the lives of millions of people on both sides, and it changed
the lives of all three of you. You had to leave your own country. When did you
know, Sia, about that you have to leave? It was a very short notice. I think it
was the second week of the war. On Monday, I was confronted by one of our
editors who said that, one, there are some rumors of military drafts. Second,
the chances are getting higher and higher that BBC will be effectively banned
from broadcasting in Russian, being in Russia. They decided to evacuate male
staff members. I was confronted on Monday, it was totally voluntary. The next
flight we could catch were like on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday. I had to
decide like in one or two days. Yeah, and I decided to go to Belgrade, which is
capital of Serbia. It was the easiest country to get in. Traditionally, Russians
and Serbs are good friends because of religion and ethnic brotherhood or
whatever. The hardest moment was saying goodbye to my mom. I was crying and I
was telling her like, do you understand what's going on? I told her, there is a
great chance that I'm gone for good. And she denied to accept this fact. She
wasn't crying and she said, that's just another deployment. You had a lot like
in 15 years of your journaling career, you'll be back. What about you, Lisa?
Well, it was a couple of days after Siavo because we didn't feel that there was
like immediate danger for women. But I was hoping that we could actually stay
just to continue our reporting because I felt that this is the only thing we
could do. Describe this reality, stay with our audience, with people who need
us, who want to know the truth about what's going on. But one day, most of the
independent media, they were blocked initially. And then the Russian parliament,
the Duma, they passed a law, which basically prohibited tell anything about this
war that doesn't confirm the official government point of view. There was a
warning that anything else will be treated as fakes. People will be prosecuted
for spreading fakes about the army, about this war. There was a good chance that
you could end up in prison. And they even banned this war, the war. In Russia,
you're supposed to call it like a special military operation, which it's not.
It's a war. And we should call it a war. That's at least our duty to tell the
truth. And the truth is that that's a war. It was clear at some point that if we
wanted to do our job, and if we wanted to do it right, we have to leave. Which
for us, again, something I would really like to say to make it clear, when we
talk about that, we should always keep in mind that what happened to our
colleagues in Ukraine, what happened to ordinary Ukrainians, that's much, much,
much worse. So when we talk about it, of course, it was problematic, but it's
not that we're but it's not was nowhere near as bad as what people in Ukraine
had to go through and are still going through, frankly, because we're talking,
we're recording this in this really nice room in office in Riga. And we're all
safe. We have a job, we have apartments, and I would not ever compare it to what
people from Ukraine had to go through. I'm very grateful that Latvia decided to
help the BBC Russian Service and gave us, you know, those humanitarian visas. On
Monday, we applied for those humanitarian visas. And on Wednesday, we got them.
That was very, very generous. It was March 10, two and a half weeks after the
war. And we packed our stuff. We only had two suitcases and two cages with our
animals. And we drove to the border. And that was when the last time I was in
Russia. Sergey, what about you? I assume you found out pretty soon that you have
to leave as well. Yeah, I did. Many of my friends had to leave Russia before. I
always thought that probably at some point I will have to leave as well. I had
like some ideas in my mind when and in which case I would do that. Of course, I
never thought about the war coming. Very soon as my colleague, Sevan Liza, has
still realized that it's probably the end for us for the BBC in Russia. And on
the 4th of March, I think that's when this law about war fakes was passed. I had
to do a live oral TV. I remember sitting in the studio and answering the
questions of the presenter talking. And I realized that, OK, that's one count of
accusation, these war fakes. OK, so that's the second. So it's probably going to
be like from 10 to eight years. Yeah. And it actually was a bad moment in my
career because I realized that I'm just talking myself into a crime considered
by the Russian authorities. Of course, it's not a crime to be a journalist. And
it was really difficult when you realize that it puts your life at risk to keep
doing that and keep doing that good at first, 10 to 12 years after it all
finished. And the fact that my colleagues were already leaving, some people were
talked to saying that the BBC should evacuate you immediately for good. And I
realized that it's already happening. Sevan, you mentioned that at first you
went to Belgrade. You're here in Riga right now, but it's been quite a journey.
Can you tell us about that journey? What was the process like? I think it was on
the one hand something like summer camp, but on the other hand, it was a
terrible nightmare. So I have a very mixed feelings. I remember clearly the day
when I was interviewing two Russian journalists and they were covering the story
about the rapes in the Kiev region. One of them were interviewing the victims
and the other one was trying to pinpoint the criminal, which is apparently a
Russian soldier who's doing this during the occupation of the Kiev region. When
I was editing this interview, it was a day of Orthodox Easter, which is from my
childhood, a very warm Christian holiday for me and was for my family. I had
this weird feeling when on one hand you're working with this terrible, terrible
stories. You're editing this interview on the day of a Christian holiday, which
honors the rebirth of Christ. And I couldn't comprehend, I was asking myself, if
there really a God above, if something like this is happening to these women and
if he's there, why isn't he stopping it? And how long were you in Belgrade
before you got here to recon? I think we spent here from two to three months.
The weird thing about Belgrade is that Serbans do really love Russians. One of
the first evenings in Belgrade, we were sitting at a pub and there was a company
of Serbans. One of them was a Russian speaking guy and at some point he
confronted us and said, I understand that you are Russians and I understand that
you're basically journalists who flee your own country. But the thing is, my
friends, they do not understand it and they want to honor you by asking the
bartender to play a Russian anthem. We said that we don't want to hear Russian
anthem because now it's a symbol of aggression for us personally. He said, you
know what guys, you'll be in big trouble if you deny it. You have to explain
somehow why don't you want to listen to it. So I said that our explanation is
that Russian anthem is a sacred music and Russians don't listen to the sacred
music while being drunk. And that was enough to have them off our backs. Sergey,
I know you arrived, I think the latest among these other two. You got here in
September. I left in, I think, 29th or 28th of March, something like that. I had
the experience of living abroad before working as a reporter for BBC Russian in
Washington, DC. In a way, it didn't feel like that bad to be living. And I
remember when we were talking with my parents, I said that, well, it's really
tense. We don't know what's going to happen next, but consider this as another
deployment. We don't know for how long. I don't know whether it was a good idea
or a bad one because I'm still probably in denial of the fact that maybe I won't
be able to come back to Russia anytime at all. But it's probably easier for me
to consider it this way than to be thinking, reflecting on the fact that I won't
be able to come back ever. I know it's really difficult. I'm one of those
journalists who had to leave Iran in 2009 and I never went back. I thought I
would go back, but I never went back. So I totally understand it's really
difficult. That's actually, if I may, for me, that was very helpful that the BBC
is so big and works in so many countries that there are many colleagues who
experienced not exactly the same things, but there are people who had to leave
their country. You know, it happened to our colleagues in Afghanistan, happened
to you, so many people, and they can actually... They can help. It was something
that, you know, especially with journalists, it happens. I was attending a
conference in Norway the last November and I accidentally bumped into a group of
the attendees. One of them was a woman from Turkey. She fled after the coup
attempt in 2016. I'm still a bit ashamed. I think I cornered her for two hours
just throwing those questions at her. How did you manage to do this and how did
you manage to do that? How do you maintain contacts with your family? And how do
you suppress these emotions and how do you process those emotions? I know, I
know. I'm telling you, we've all been through it seriously. Is it starting to
feel a bit more like home for you here or now? I think at some point my wife
said, wherever we're going to go to the rest of our lives, there will be no
place that will feel like home. Your lives have definitely changed. Has that,
you know, all of you leaving your country behind, leaving parts of your family
behind and coming here and living and making a new life here, has it brought you
guys closer to each other? Has it changed the dynamic of the DvC Russian team?
Seva has never been about the place when we were working together in Moscow for
more than seven years, I think. Now you have. We have been in each other much
more. We used to do that in Moscow. We are visiting each other much more. And
like the majority of our team didn't have any friends here in Latvia and we are
socializing inside our circle of journalists. But I think that in a way,
especially here, that the experience which we're going through will be hard to
explain to many other people. And in our circle, we can be super open about it
without any judgment. I wouldn't complain about like my feelings on like Twitter
right now. I know that there are many people whose sufferings are much worse
than mine. And I respect that. I mean, the world is now is focused on like
helping Ukrainians and this is how it should be. But we have our own circle to
sort of discuss our issues. And it is something that is very, very, very
important to me. Having people who love you, who understand you and who won't
judge you, it's really important and we're really, really lucky to have that.
Thank you to Liza Forgth, Sergei Gorryashko and Sieva Boyko for sharing their
stories with us. Don't go away. More to come from Riga on the fifth floor after
the break. This is the BBC World Service exploring the seriously fun work of the
Flying Seagull Project. My name is Captain Bash. Ash has been on a mission to
bring fun and frivolity to disadvantaged children, children in refugee camps, in
orphanages and care homes. These kids probably have gone through some of the
worst traumas and they don't have access to counsellors or therapists. Ash and
the Seagulls aren't therapists, they're clowns. So they do what they do best to
help. Escapism and fun. Give them something to wake up excited about, give them
something to go to bed giggling about. Otherwise, what is the point? When the
Greek government allowed children in refugee camps to go to school, the kids
who'd been working with the Seagulls did far better than the other kids. If they
can believe themselves to be limitless and valuable, then maybe they can go into
the next challenge of their life with that arsenal of self-confidence. Flying
Seagulls. Child's Play. Tuesday at 9.30 and 20 GMT. Still to come on the fifth
floor, we hear from the BBC Russian team in Riga about how the move from Moscow
has changed the way they work. Back in Russia, I used to be a reporter. I was
going to protest rallies to film it and I went on duty trips. And now we are
kind of glued to our desks and to our phones and we can't go neither to Ukraine
nor to Russia. More from BBC Russian after the latest BBC News. BBC News with
David Harper. Travel restrictions are in force for in Nigeria, hours ahead of
presidential elections, seen as the most unpredictable in years. There are
controls on the movement of vehicles, land borders are shut and soldiers have
been patrolling key areas. The polls coincide with heightened security in
Nigeria. The United States and the European Union have imposed more sanctions on
Russia a year after President Putin launched the invasion of Ukraine. G7 leaders
say they'll punish any countries that help Russia evade sanctions. The number of
people killed by this month's catastrophic earthquakes in Turkey and northern
Syria has risen above 50,000. Civil defence workers in Syria have called for
more international help for injured children. A prominent Tunisian lawyer and
critic of President Khais Saeed has become the latest to be detained during a
wave of arrests. Khazi Shaua Shi has recently accused Mr Saeed of presiding over
injustice and failure. Suspected gang members in El Salvador have been moved to
a new huge prison as part of what President Bukhale calls a war on crime. Large
numbers of people have been rounded up under a state of emergency. Rescuers in
Brazil are searching for survivors of floods and landslides which have killed
more than 50 people. Most were in and around a coastal town in Sao Paulo state.
President Biden has defended his administration's response to a train derailment
in Ohio. He's been criticised for not visiting the site in East Palestine. Los
Angeles is braced for its first blizzard in more than 30 years. Snow is already
falling in some areas. The main north-south highway, Interstate 5, was closed
through the Tahone Pass. Antony Almenazi will shortly become the first serving
Australian Prime Minister to march in the gay and lesbian Mardi Gras in Sydney,
one of the world's largest such events. He'll be joined by the Foreign Minister
Penny Wong, who is the first openly gay woman in Australia's Parliament. BBC
News. Hello and welcome back to the fifth floor. I'm Farina Kamidi. We are in
the Latvian capital, Riga, meeting BBC Russians Moscow team, who are now based
here. It's an almost sunny day, but very cold. I've left the office and I've
come to the old town. It's an area known for its historical buildings and
churches. It has narrow cobblestone alleys lined with cafes, bars and souvenir
shops. And I'm here with Oksana Antonenko. She's the only Latvian member of the
BBC Russian team here. Oksana, thanks for being with me. Why did you choose this
particular place to have a conversation with me today? Well, actually, it is the
place where I live. I live in the old town, which is called Vatsriga in Latvian.
And it's the very heart, the very centre of the capital. Normally, it's filled
with tourists, bars and cafes, and everything is so loud and noisy and fun. But
now in winter, it's, as you just said, just cold, even though it's not even cold
for us. I am freezing. But I know that Latvia, especially Riga, has changed ever
since the war in Ukraine started. And that's why you've chosen this particular
bar that we're standing outside right now. Explain to us, please. Yes, you're
very right. Riga has changed a lot since the war broke out. Latvia has changed.
The whole region has changed. And this particular bar is actually Ukrainian. So
they sell just one drink there, which is called Pianayevi Shnier, which is
translated as drunken cherry. So we have this Ukrainian influence all over the
city. You can see Ukrainian flags everywhere. Latvia has welcomed 42,000
Ukrainian refugees since the beginning of the war. Only majority came here
because of relatives. Well, you know, it used to be one country, I mean, the
Soviet Union. And people used to travel a lot. And they moved to different
places, different corners of the country. For that reason, many of us still have
relatives from Ukraine. But it's not just Ukrainians who came here, also
Russians who were forced to flee Russia because of the political situation,
including Russian journalists. And how has that changed your work life? Because
you used to be the only BBC Russian team member who was here in Riga reporting
on Baltic stories. But now things have changed. You have almost 50 other BBC
Russian colleagues here. Yes, you're right. It's a very weird feeling, I would
say, because we probably used to be the smallest bureau or maybe one of the
smallest bureaus in the BBC. We were just three people in the office. I mean,
now we are almost 50 and they are bringing something, maybe they see something
that we do not see. And it's also a cultural exchange, even though I also speak
Russian as my first language. But you know, people who speak Russian in
different parts of the world are also different. So I would say it's an
interesting experience. And are you busier than before? I would say that, but it
has actually nothing to do with my colleagues from Moscow, because since the war
broke out, life changed a lot also for journalists, and especially in this
region because we have a border with Russia. Because you know, this country and
the whole region is kind of preparing for a potential crisis that can happen. So
I have many things to report on. I used to be a Baltic correspondent, but since
the beginning of the war, I have worked from Poland, Hungary, Finland, other
countries. So it kind of makes me very busy. Oksana, thank you. Let's get out of
the cold, go back to the office and meet some other members of the team. Thank
you. We are here at the fifth floor. It's a very nice meeting. I am here to talk
to the national language services. I am here at the BBC World Service.com, the
fifth floor. So we are back indoors and it's nice and warm. Oksana is still with
me. And also two other members of the team, Misha Poplovsky and Natalia Zatova.
We are going to be talking more about how BBC Russian has adapted to a new life
and a new way of working and how the future might look after a year of enormous
change for everyone. Natasha, I'm going to start with you. You were working in
the BBC Moscow bureau, but you actually left the BBC and moved here, moved to
Riga before all of this and before all of your other colleagues. Tell us why.
Well, me and my husband stopped feeling safe in Russia because several years
prior, my husband worked as a photojournalist with Navalny. He's like the
opposition leader in Russia and currently he's in jail. And after he was put in
jail, police was after his allies, his coworkers and me and my husband, we were
just worried for my husband's freedom. So we decided to leave Russia and we
actually came to Riga a month before the war started. And of course, we had no
idea it will. So why did you choose Riga? Why did your husband choose Riga?
Well, my husband works at Medusa, it's a very important media in Russia right
now. And they have moved to Latvia like several years ago. And when we decided
to leave, Medusa helped us. And just a month after that, the war started and my
colleagues started to come here. So like Riga is a very logical place for
Russia. And Natasha, when you moved here, were you planning to continue to do
some sort of journalism? I guess I wanted to, but I didn't know how and I was
actually worried. And then like only a month after we moved, the BBC basically
came to me. And Oksana, would you say that Riga has become a hub for Russian
journalists nowadays? I think you can definitely say that. The Medusa that
Natasha mentioned, they actually started this trend years ago, but it wasn't
just Medusa, there were also other Russian journalists and oppositional
politicians. Well, Baltic countries were generally popular with the Russian
opposition. But Riga, it is in the middle, it isn't center, it has quite a good
airport. So it is well connected. Russian language is spoken here. So probably
nowadays you can find more Russian journalists in Riga than in any other
European city. And would you say that has become a political issue and part of
the political debate here in Latvia? Well, the thing is, which complicated
everything actually, we had elections in October. The same year the war started.
And the war was started by a country, which is our actual neighbor. And we're
talking about journalists coming from this particular country. So yes, for all
these reasons, it did become a political issue. Some politicians were actually
suspicious about any kind of Russians coming to this country like, you know,
they are opposition, but who knows? I mean, this was the narratives. And there
were also politicians who were eager to support them because again, it is their
narrative. If there is no free media for Russians, then how can we hope for
democracy? What about the general public? Well, I wouldn't say that this issue
was very popular among general public. Because as I mentioned, Latvia welcomed
something like 42,000 Ukrainians. And there was something like, I guess, 300
visas given to male Russian journalists and their family members. So these
numbers are not even comparable. Misha, you had to leave Russia in a hurry along
with your other BBC Russian colleagues from Moscow. How well did you know Latvia
and the region in general? Well, I was not unfamiliar with it. Let's put it that
way. Because my mom, she used to live in neighboring Lithuania. So we actually
went quite a few times to Riga even before COVID. So as a tourist, I've known
both the city and the country as some of its other towns and cities. I know that
among your BBC Russian colleagues and the team, you're known for being very good
in languages. How are you doing with your Latvian at the moment? It progresses.
Yeah, it keeps progressing. The best part was getting smaller bits of validation
from Latvian speakers, for instance, coming to the same coffee shop after
several months break and speaking Latvian to the very same barista. And they
would be surprised and say, wow, you didn't speak Latvian at all when you were
here last time. Well, now I do. It keeps on moving. So how many languages do you
speak right now? Well, Latvian is about to become my seventh. Oh, wow. Natasha?
Yeah, once I went into a coffee shop and I saw Misha, he was ordering coffee and
something. It was such a great Latvian. And I'm really Latvian too, but I'm not
that fluent. And I was nervous that I just had to speak it and show him that I
can do it too. And then like, man, let's pay your police. And yeah, that's a
little bit embarrassing. So yeah, but I'm quite enthusiastic about learning
Latvian as well. Like I think two million people speak Latvian in the whole
world. And I feel like a little bit exceptional. And Natasha, tell us about the
impact of the move you've made on your journalism. I guess our professional
lives are hugely changed because, well, back in Russia, I used to be a reporter.
I was like going to protest rallies to film it and travel to like, you know,
with music bands through Russia, who the Russian authorities tried to ban. And I
went on duty trips like to a Siberian forest where people created their own
religion and build their own town, you know. And now we are kind of glued to our
desks and to our phones and we can't go neither to Ukraine nor to Russia. I
guess you have to do your best with the circumstances you have given. Misha, I
see you nodding as well. Does that resonate with you? Well, yes, no. I mean, in
a sense, of course, yeah, I get this change. But on a professional side, I've
never been like doing interviews out there in the field. So for me, this part of
job hasn't changed as much. If anything, I kind of, despite the fact that
triggers some many times smaller than Moscow, I kind of feel going more
international now because there are so many opportunities to connect with like
either our UK colleagues or European colleagues. One of the languages I speak is
actually Ukrainian. And since the war started and we moved here, I've been asked
a few times by my colleagues at the BBC Ukrainian to do social media shifts for
them in Ukrainian that I didn't anticipate at all when I was in Moscow. And
Natasha, when you were in Moscow, a huge city, and you were able to travel all
over and interview people face to face, now you are in Riga, a much smaller
city, and reporting on a lot of time what is happening in Moscow. So working
remotely, tell me about it. How is it? You still can work from here. It's
through your phone, through internet, but you still can do the important stuff.
Like two days ago, I published a story about Russians who were imprisoned for
talking about the war, for opposing the war. Like one talked on the phone, the
other wrote in a chat, and a third person published a post on social media, and
they all were charged with several years in prison and in prison. And yeah, you
still can publish such stuff. And it's important for our Russian readers to have
this information. Misha, what do you like most about living here in Latvia?
Well, first of all, yeah, this experience that I mentioned before, going kind of
more international, it's interesting that I really can practice all the
languages I have within a week time, which is definitely not a thing in Moscow,
despite the fact that this being so much larger. Here, it is just like so much
easier to find like international groups of people. It's very refreshing from
that point of view. I also like the fact that I can go pretty much anywhere I
want by bike, which I already did in Moscow, but it was kind of much harder, and
me as a cyclist, like in the winter, it's been like a great change for the
better. How come? Well, because cycling in Moscow can be challenging in a way
that you're left with a lot of dirt because of the grit which stays on the
asphalt, and it can cover your shoes and your like jeans or whatever. That's why
it has a much faster expiry date than it would have here. And in Riga, I'm not
challenged with that whatsoever. Natasha, what about you? Any big discoveries in
Latvia that are your highlights? Well, I've discovered that life in a smaller
city can be very comfortable. I was born and raised in Moscow, so I thought that
my place was in the huge cities like Moscow or New York or London, but it turns
out I love how close everything is in Riga, so I can walk from home to work to a
theater to all the cafes, whatever I'm going. And I also love living by the sea.
Oksana, you have a smile on your face. How does it feel to have all of your BBC
Moscow colleagues here discovering your country? It's interesting, yes, and I'm
happy that people are kind of adapting to changes and start maybe to see things
in a different way. I can imagine myself if you live in a big city and you have
all the options and probably more theaters than all the Baltic countries put
together. But, well, actually, here the big benefit of this place, well, there
are many minuses, don't get me wrong, but you will live in Europe. That is a
small country, it's a small city, but our playground is actually very big and
it's very accessible. And I think I hope that my colleagues will get to know
that too, that they will learn something not just about Latvia, but about Europe
in general. Natasha, what do you think about the future and how do you feel
about what lies ahead? Well, I try not to think about the future too much
because I don't want to have high expectations. If the past year has taught me
anything, it's that I can make all my plans, all the plans that I want, but that
doesn't stop someone like Putin from changing my whole life because of his
strange ideas. And what gives me hope is I do volunteer work at the Ukrainian
Community Center. It was founded by Latvians and many Russians and Ukrainians
work there together. And that place really gives me hope that there is still
room for kindness and understanding and teamwork in this world. Misha, what
about you? What are your hopes and anxieties maybe for the future? Well, maybe
strangely enough, in Moscow it was already and it's quite common in Russia
basically to live day by day in Carpe Diem. Here I actually during the past year
learned to think about future more. But yeah, also working with my Ukrainian
colleagues, I can resonate very well with Natasha that it kind of gives you hope
that there will be some path to reconciliation. Oksana, I know that your
situation is a bit different, but what are your hopes? Yeah, it's a challenging
question because for the past year, all that people in this region think about
is whether this is coming here or not. If there will be another war somewhere
else. So in the first place, I hope that nothing like that will happen here.
Because even though it's not a war zone, sometimes it feels like because Latv,
for example, is reintroducing conscription. There are many different laws that
kind of remind you that not everything is okay. So probably the perfect version,
the perfect way would be Russia to change so much that we would forget about
this scenario. Thank you all so much for talking to us. That was Oksana
Antonienko, Natalia Zatova and Misha Poplovsky. And a big thank you to everyone
from the BC Russian team for welcoming us. That's all from us this week on the
fifth floor. From the Latvian capsule, Riga, I'm Farina Kamidi. Thanks for
listening. This is the BBC World Service and you're listening to Witness History
with me, Josephine McDermott. Today we're going back to the 27th of July 2012
and a spectacle watched by an estimated 900 million people around the world. It
is often said to be one of the best moments from an Olympic Games opening
ceremony. I'm Frank Gottschalkbois, I'm a writer and I'm very proud to say that
I was part of the team that created the moment when the Queen jumped out of the
helicopter. It's 2011 and Frank and the film director Danny Boyle have a washing
line hanging up in their office. On it they've pegged different ideas for what
will happen in the ceremony to kick off the 2012 Games in London. We had a
designer called Mart Hillsley who is a brilliant, brilliant designer and quite
early on he bought in a fully storyboarded idea about how the Queen would arrive
by jumping out of a helicopter. We all said, that's brilliant but it's never
going to happen. Put it up on the washing line anyway so that we know that we've
got to think of something better and as the months went by, of course, we
couldn't think of anything better. Then a year out we got a producer on board,
Tracy Seawood, and she said, what's this? And we went, this is Mark's idea but
we know it can't happen, we've got to think of something better. So Tracy sort
of broke it down into steps to see if it would be possible and we decided that
it would be possible if we hired an actress and the actress looked a little bit
like the Queen but dressed exactly like the Queen and we put the actress in the
helicopter and just faked it and that would be fine. So all we needed was
permission from the palace to represent the Queen in that way and also the
inside track on what the Queen would be wearing on the day. So Tracy went to the
palace and she sort of explained this to Angela Kelly, the Queen's dresser who
said, oh, you mean you don't want her to be in it? And Tracy said, well, no, of
course not. No, we'd be having an actress who wouldn't dream of asking the
Queen. She said, oh, I wouldn't mention that if I were you, she wants to be in
it. So Tracy came back from what should have been a very ordinary meeting with
the news that I would now be writing a script for the Queen of England and Danny
would be directing the Queen of England in a sketch with James Bond. We were
just aghast. Starts with an establishing shot of Buckingham Palace, which is
obviously unmistakable. Then a taxi pulls in onto that huge forecourt and out
steps James Bond and we track James Bond up the stairs inside the palace. He's
got that panther-like walk of his and there's some corgis follow him. And on the
day, the corgis were very problematic because corgis are not the most
cooperative of dogs and they're not good tempered either. Were they actually the
Queen's dogs? They're actually the Queen's corgis. And Mark, the designer, was
sort of in charge of them on the day and they took a lot of bribing to behave
properly. So James Bond has to brave the corgis. Then he opens the door and
there's a figure of a woman sitting at a desk working and she doesn't
acknowledge his presence. And then he coughs and she turns around and says, good
evening, Mr Bond. If you look at the way Danny's directed that moment, it's
brilliant because he holds on the back of her head for a long time. And then she
turns to camera and you go, oh my days, it's actually the Queen. And a friend of
mine was in New York at the time. It was a hot night and he had his window open.
And that moment when the Queen turned round to the camera, he said, you could
hear all over Greenwich Village where he lived, the other side of the world, you
could hear this cheer go up because no one was expecting that. Then the Queen
leaves her office accompanied by James Bond and by tall Paul, who was her
equerry, who she really wanted to be in the film. Then they walked through the
palace. They eventually come out of the palace to where the helicopter is
waiting for them. It looks as though the Queen gets into the helicopter. But in
fact, once they're in the helicopter, it isn't the Queen. It's our stuntman,
Mark Sutton, who is incredibly brave, creative stunt person who has since
unfortunately died. But on that day, that's probably the stunt that he'd be most
famous for because the helicopter then goes through London, goes under Tower
Bridge to the tune of the Dambusters March, which was very exciting. That was my
role. Hollywood moment. Yeah, Hollywood moment. My role on the day I was on
Tower Bridge holding up a sign saying, low flying helicopters. No, you weren't.
You weren't, really. It goes across London and then for the audience in the
stadium, it looks as they followed the journey of that helicopter across London
and now it's there above their heads. There's no question in their minds that
the Queen is in that helicopter. The door of the helicopter opens. The figure
jumps out and the James Bond theme bursts out across the stadium and a massive
Union Jack parachute opens and the figure descends. To all intents and purposes,
the Queen has jumped out of a helicopter and very shortly afterwards she arrives
in the stadium and the place went... I mean, I was in the stadium and the place
went wild. It's like a magician. A magician knows how the trick works, but the
magician doesn't know that the trick is going to work. The magician knows how to
palm a card, but he doesn't know that the member of the audience is going to buy
that. So on the night you had that tension of like, I know how this should work,
but is it going to work? So I was as surprised as anybody else on the night. Do
you have any insight into what the Queen made of the whole thing? I mean, she
looks quite taken aback when everybody stands and applauds her after that moment
in the stadium. Yeah, when she comes into the stadium, she looks completely
unsettled. And I think it's partly because she... Like everybody involved in
that, you can quite realise just how good it was. That the reaction would be so
extreme because it just seemed like a kind of novelty way. But actually it was
more than a novelty and it was more than funny. It seemed to capture something
real in the atmosphere. It was joyous, which is different from funny. Funny is
often at somebody's expense. Joyous is a different thing. Joyous is innocent
laughter and something eternal about that, I think. And that stadium was full of
rapturously elevated laughter and it's an unusual sound. You don't hear it very
often. Frank had written this amazing moment, but her Majesty had helped too.
She had two observations. One was that Mark had drawn the helicopter going under
Tower Bridge, but she said, oh, this is the wrong kind of helicopter. If you're
going to go as low as that, you need. And she told us which kind of helicopter
we need. So the Queen was very, very helicopter aware. That was the first thing.
And then the second thing, of course, is that she asked for a line. We never put
a line in the script because we didn't think the Queen would want a line. But on
the day, she said to Danny, I do feel that I should have a line. Looking back on
it now, I am really proud of it. I think partly because it's quite I love this
country. I love my country. It's quite difficult to express patriotism in the UK
without falling into the trap of nationalism or exceptionalism and say that you
just love this country because it's this country, not because it's better than
anybody else's or whatever, whatever. I'm not trying to excuse its history. And
I think one of the great uses of the monarchy was that it's able to sort of pull
together lots of different strands and to make you feel OK about them. So I
think the fact that we use something as ceremonial and as ancient and as, you
know, let's be frank, elitist and hierarchical as the monarchy in a funny way,
really crystallized something good about this country. And to have come up with
a moment that says, you know, we can be all these different things at the same
time seems to me really hopeful and really important. Frank Cottrell Boyce went
on to write another scene for Her Majesty in 2022, celebrating her 70 years on
the throne. She acted alongside the children's character Paddington Bear. It
would be one of her last appearances before she died on the 8th of September
that year. Frank Cottrell Boyce was speaking to me, Josephine McDermott, for
that edition of Witness History. This is the BBC World Service with The
Invention of Russia. We're telling the story of the largest country in the
world. In episode three of the series, Catherine the Great comes to power when
her husband is murdered. She was very involved in the coup, but not necessarily.
We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third
party services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently listening to
will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart
speaker and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're
listening on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.
Huge tech sector has adapted to a year of war and controlling a VR jet ski with
the power of my mind.