TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 through in the afternoon. On FM, Longwave and BBC Sounds, this is Radio 4. It's
ten o'clock, good evening, this is The World Tonight with Rita Lashar. The UK
and the European Union have agreed new post-Brexit trading rules for Northern
Ireland, describing the deal as a new chapter in their relationship. As a
Conservative, a Brexiteer and a Unionist, I believe passionately, with my head
and my heart, that this is the right way forward. Right for Northern Ireland,
right for our United Kingdom and I commend it to this House. But the Democratic
Unionists still have their doubts. Can you understand why we don't have
confidence in that and why we still fear that our position within the United
Kingdom is not going to be restored by this agreement? We assess concerns about
the deal and ask how this negotiation may have been different from previous UK-
EU talks. Also, we remember Lady Boothroyd, who's died at the age of 93. Order,
order, I really must seek a withdrawal from the Honourable Gentleman. Order
about the use of the word false. And as I wrap up my time on The World Tonight,
we look back on how the world has changed over the past 15 years. That's all
after the BBC News read tonight by Chris Aldridge. The UK and the European Union
have announced changes to the arrangements governing post-Brexit trade in
Northern Ireland. The protocol has been replaced by the Windsor Framework.
Announcing the deal in the Berkshire town, the Prime Minister acknowledged both
sides had had their differences in the past, but the agreement would end the
uncertainty for the people of Northern Ireland. Here's our political
correspondent, Jonathan Blake. In Windsor, Rishi Sunak and the European
Commission President, Ursula von der Leyen, claimed their agreement was an
historic breakthrough that marked a turning point for Northern Ireland and UK-EU
relations. The Prime Minister said it would ensure smooth trade, using green and
red lanes to separate goods staying in Northern Ireland with those destined for
the Republic of Ireland. Sovereignty would be restored, he said, with the so-
called Stormont Break, which could stop new EU laws applying in Northern
Ireland. In the Commons, to cheers from Tory backbenchers, Mr Sunak said the
deal achieved what many said couldn't be done. Where's Boris, Labour MPs jeered
as the Prime Minister paid tribute to the work of his predecessors. Sir Keir
Starmer said it was an imperfect compromise, but again pledged Labour's support.
The former Prime Minister, Theresa May, urged all sides to back the deal. David
Davis, once Brexit Secretary, called it a spectacular success. Some
Conservatives were more circumspect. Marc Francois, chair of the Eurosceptic
European Research Group, wanted reassurance there wouldn't be any nasty
surprises in the text. The DUP leader, Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, acknowledged
progress had been made, but warned that key issues of concern remained. The
Northern Ireland Minister and former chair of the ERG, Steve Baker, explained
why the emergency break clause was significant. If sovereignty is the power to
say no, as I think it often is, this is a terrific achievement. I'm delighted.
As late as yesterday, I still thought I might have to resign. But this is the,
this is the, in the end, the mechanism by which I'm sure I can back this
wholeheartedly. The Sinn Fein Vice President, Michelle O'Neill, said the deal
needed to lead to a restoration of power sharing at Stormont. All political
parties need to be sitting around the executive table taking decisions that
impact on people's lives. That's where we should be today. There shouldn't be
any delays in that. We have a health service in crisis. We have public sector
workers out on the picket line. Where we need to be is making politics work and
standing up for the people that we represent collectively. And I think that's
where all energies and efforts need to be now. A minute's silence has been held
in Parliament in memory of the first woman to be elected Commons Speaker,
Baroness Boothroyd, who's died at the age of 93. The current Speaker, Sir
Lindsay Hoyle, described her as one of a kind, while the former Prime Minister,
Sir John Major, said she set a standard for all her successors. Our political
correspondent Helen Catt reports. Betty Boothroyd had been on the stage as a
dancer, one of the famous tiller girls. She worked as a secretary to politicians
before becoming a Labour MP in West Bromwich. In 1992, she became the first
female Speaker, with a brisk, no-nonsense style that became internationally
famous thanks to the broadcasting of Parliament. She chose not to wear the
traditional Speaker's wig, but upheld most Commons customs. Asked how she'd like
to be addressed, she told MPs, call me Madam. After eight years, she retired as
an MP and later entered the Lords as Baroness Boothroyd, where she was a fierce
opponent of plans to elect peers and a vocal critic of Brexit and, on occasion,
Boris Johnson. The budget carrier, Wizz Air, has announced it's suspending all
flights to the Moldovan capital, Chisinau, because of safety concerns. Russian
missiles aimed at Ukraine have entered Moldovan airspace this month. The airline
said the safety of its passengers and crew was the number one priority. The
suspension will come into force from March 14th. An Israeli man has died of his
wounds after being shot while driving in the occupied West Bank. Israel had
deployed extra troops to the area after a Palestinian man was shot dead
overnight during rioting by Israeli settlers. Buildings and cars belonging to
Palestinians were set alight. The riot was in response to the killing yesterday
of two Jewish brothers in the West Bank. A White House spokesperson, John Kirby,
said there needed to be a de-escalation of tensions. We condemn the violence, of
course, in all its forms. We also fully agree with the statements from President
Herzog and Prime Minister Netanyahu that citizens cannot take the law into their
own hands. What happened was totally unacceptable, something that we've heard
loud and clear from our Israeli partners. Nigeria's two main opposition parties
have alleged fraud in the country's tightly contested presidential election.
Provisional results from nearly half of the 36 states suggest the governing
party's candidate, Bona Tinebu, is in the lead. The fraud claims relate to a new
electronic voting system. From Lagos, our correspondent Mayoni Jones reports.
Election results traditionally take days to be announced in Africa's most
populous country. There had been hopes that a new electronic system would change
this, but it seems to have backfired. Polling station agents should have
uploaded their results onto the Electoral Commission's website straight after
counting ended, but that didn't happen. Voters reported issues with the voting
machines and poor connectivity. It took more than 24 hours for the first results
to be announced, fueling speculation or foul play in a country with a history of
vote-buying and rigging. Now the opposition says it has evidence the machines
malfunctioned in several states. The head of the Electoral Commission has denied
this and stands by the results. The farming minister Mark Spencer has asked
supermarkets to re-examine how they purchase fruit and vegetables to avoid
further salad shortages. Lidl, Asda, Morrisons and Aldi have all imposed
customer purchase limits on tomatoes, cucumbers and peppers because of
unseasonable weather in southern Europe and North Africa. Mr Spencer said he
used a meeting with supermarkets to reiterate the need for longer-term solutions
to avoid similar situations. The Michelin Guide has shocked the culinary world
by removing a star from the Paris restaurant of Guy Savoie, a chef who's
frequently named the best in the world, had held three-star status at Monet de
Paris since 2002. Reasons behind the removal of stars are not made public and
only communicated to the chefs involved. Oh dear, thank you Chris. You're
listening to The World Tonight with Rita Lashar. Brexit, the never-ending story,
delivered something of a major plot twist today which may also mark the
beginning of a denouement. Three years after our exit from the European Union,
the UK and the EU have agreed the Windsor Framework, a new deal aimed at fixing
the post-Brexit problems in Northern Ireland, which was announced by the Prime
Minister Rishi Sunak and the President of the European Commission Ursula von der
Leyen. At a joint press conference they spoke warmly of a decisive breakthrough
and the beginning of a new chapter. Later, speaking in the House of Commons,
Rishi Sunak spoke of his belief that the new framework answered the needs and
concerns of the people of Northern Ireland. I would not be standing here today
if I did not believe today's agreement marks a turning point for the people of
Northern Ireland. It is clearly in the interests of the people and those of us
who are passionate about the cause of unionism for power sharing to return. Of
course, parties will want to consider the agreement in detail, a process that
will need time and care. And there are of course many voices and perspectives
within Northern Ireland and it is a job of government to respect them all. And
in a measure of how the Windsor Framework could change the dynamic of the
relationship with the EU, the Prime Minister said the Northern Ireland Protocol
Bill, which would have allowed the UK government to unilaterally override parts
of the original arrangements for Northern Ireland, would now be abandoned.
Because we have achieved a new negotiated agreement which preserves the balance
of the Belfast Good Friday Agreement, the original and sound justification
legally for the Bill has now fallen away. In other words, neither do we need the
Bill and nor do we have a credible basis to pursue it. As such, we will no
longer proceed with the Bill and the European Union will no longer proceed with
their legal actions against the UK. And in the past few minutes, President
Biden's described the deal as an essential step to ensuring peace from the Good
Friday Agreement is preserved. The original protocol was supposed to prevent the
creation of a hard border on the island of Ireland. But it did so by essentially
creating a border in the Irish Sea instead, something Northern Ireland's
unionists rejected. I asked our political editor, Chris Mason, how this major
obstacle has been overcome. Well, in essence, we've seen something of a climb
down from the European Union, they've been willing to be more flexible, frankly,
than they were willing to be a few years ago. And the essence of trying to deal
with that border issue, that border in the Irish Sea, as so many critics have
described it is to create what's known as a green lane so that products that are
moving from England, Scotland and Wales to Northern Ireland, i.e. within the UK
and staying in Northern Ireland, will be able to travel across that sea border,
but not a national border, much, much more easily. And it'll only be products
that are heading from Great Britain into the Republic of Ireland, i.e. the
European Union and potentially further on into other EU countries that will go
through what's known as a red lane and will be subject to checks. And as far as
a fair number of critics in Northern Ireland are concerned, as far as the
previous protocol is concerned, this is a big leap forward because their concern
was about creating what looked like a division, a border within the UK, as
opposed to taking issue with the fact that a different country or different
bloc's rules would obviously be subject to different rules and therefore would
be checked. The other major bone of contention, though, was the role of the
European Court of Justice, which has the final say on EU law and the single
market, but it also had jurisdiction in Northern Ireland under the original
protocol. Has that role actually been reduced? The European Court of Justice
remains, and that was something said explicitly by Ursula von der Leyen, the
President of the European Commission, at the news conference earlier on. There
is an attempt to reassure that it won't be reached for any more necessarily than
circumstances mean that it has to. But the bottom line is that the final court
of the European Union and therefore when there are issues around its single
market, which Northern Ireland for good still remains a part of, the European
Court of Justice is still there. And that will cause some anxiety for some
sceptics, there is no doubt. The other element that I think is interesting and
that the real detail on that will be looked over in the coming days is this idea
of a Stormont break. In other words, finding and designing a mechanism to create
some sort of democratic scrutiny within Northern Ireland for changing EU rules
in the future, because the EU's rules will change and will therefore be imposed
on Northern Ireland in the sectors of the economy that are subject to EU rules,
what's known in the jargon, horrible jargon, as dynamic alignment. What the two
sides have agreed on is this Stormont break, as they call it, which will allow
in certain circumstances Northern Ireland's politicians to say, hang on, we're
not very keen on this, for there to be potentially something of a pause or even
a block. Now the question will be in what circumstances precisely can that be
used in practice in the months and years ahead and whether the barriers to
making it happen are deemed to be too high or too low. But certainly the Prime
Minister and the Commission President thought that that was a significant move
forward. As I say, I think what's key now is giving those, again to use a
horrible political phrase, stakeholders at the core of this, not least Northern
Ireland's democratic unionists, a proper chance to read the legal text, to read
the real detail as opposed to the rhetoric around all of this and for them
ultimately to decide whether it's something that they think washes or not. Well,
from what we've heard tonight, can Rishi Sunak be sure that he has the support
of the democratic unionists? No, I don't think he can. I mean, there's been some
democratic unionist MPs who've been explicitly critical. Now the democratic
unionists are themselves a broad church and contain a range of views and the
outlook expressed by Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, the party leader, was more subtle,
was more nuanced and that matters because while it would appear a good number of
conservative MPs have tonight sounded much, much more warm towards Rishi Sunak's
deal than some might have imagined, the ultimate prize here is re-establishing
devolved government in Northern Ireland. Democratic unionist party walked away
from it just over a year ago because of concerns about the protocol. Their
willingness to buy that this package, this framework is better than what went
before is really key because critics will say unless the Prime Minister can
persuade the DUP to go back into power sharing, for all of the other positives
that he and his team are pointing to tonight that this deal can deliver anyway,
it'll have fallen at the biggest hurdle if devolved government doesn't return.
So that remains the big prize and we can't be certain how that'll turn out.
Chris Mason, our political editor. Well, let's hear from the unionists now.
Sammy Wilson is a DUP MP and the party's chief whip at Westminster. He joins me
now. Good evening. Good evening. Sammy Wilson, there's been a warm welcome for
today's deal from some once quite sceptical quarters. Where does the DUP stand
tonight? Well, first of all, we have said that we want to examine the legal text
and examine it and get an analysis of it. On the face of it, the government has
spun the framework in a very positive way. But when one looks at some of the,
even on the political declaration side, without looking at the legal text, there
are many contradictions in it. The one thing which we do know, and the Prime
Minister admitted this, it's also contained in the framework, the Winter
Framework document, is that EU law will continue to apply in Northern Ireland.
And whilst the Prime Minister said 1,700 pages of EU law will no longer apply,
there are hundreds of thousands of laws, pages of law, which will still apply
and in future new laws will apply. And indeed... But there is this storm on
break, isn't there? There is a mechanism now, there is the storm on break, a
mechanism now for you to challenge new laws as they come into force. No, we can
highlight, first of all, the laws have to have a significant impact and we don't
know what that means. Don't forget, since Brexit and since the protocol came
into being, we've had 670 new EU laws applying to Northern Ireland. Some of
those only affect small changes initially, but then have a bigger impact as we
see the way in which they work out. So the first thing is that we've got to, we
can only identify and object to certain laws. Secondly, there has to be a
petition of concern. And thirdly, once that petition of concern has been
registered and the law has been voted against, it is up to the UK government to
decide whether in the Joint Committee it seeks to veto those laws. And it also
states clearly that the EU would have then the right to retaliate. Now, I've got
to say... But you're clearly concerned then, you're clearly concerned about the
new mechanism that's been put in place. How long is it going to take you to look
over this document? And how strong are those concerns? Are you suggesting that
the DUP may reject it? Well, I'm saying that if you look at on the surface, the
guarantees which are there aren't really guarantees. And even some of the
statements we made about VAT rules now being able to apply across the whole of
the United Kingdom, including Northern Ireland. If you read the legal text, if
it affects competition with the EU, then the EU can intervene and indicate that
the UK cannot impose or apply VAT changes to Northern Ireland. And even with the
state aid rules, again, the legal text doesn't make it quite as clear as what is
contained in the framework document. How much pressure do you think the DUP is
going to face in the next few weeks and months? President Biden, for instance,
tonight has said, I hope as we all do that Northern Ireland's political
institutions are soon back up and running. Those institutions embody the
principle of devolved power sharing representative government at the core of the
Good Friday Agreement. Well, I think that first of all, President Biden, if more
than anyone should understand that people should not have things imposed on them
if they don't have a say in them. After all, his own country originated because
they refused to have taxation without representation. And Northern Ireland will
still continue to have foreign law imposed on it without proper representation.
And secondly, we don't really care what pressure is imposed on us. The future of
our country within the United Kingdom is at stake. And therefore, if this
document does not get that right and does not give a guarantee that we will
remain fully part of the United Kingdom, then we will continue to oppose it.
Sammy Wilson, thank you very much indeed. Well, Ireland, which of course shares
a land border with Northern Ireland and the UK, would like to get Brexit done,
probably more than any other EU state. So what does the Irish government make of
today's agreement? Peter Burke is the Minister for EU Affairs. He was very
positive. This is a very important agreement to provide stability and
predictability for Northern Ireland, for the citizens of the north and indeed
businesses. I think what really helped us over the last few weeks is the deal
that was agreed between the UK and the EU on data sharing, because that allowed
the EU27 get a significant picture of the profile of goods entering in through
Northern Ireland. And the more robust procedures you have, the more flexibility
you can give because of the additional safeguards. So I'd really welcome the
deal and I hope it provides the pathway to get the Northern Ireland institutions
back up and running and delivering for the citizens of Northern Ireland. Peter
Burke, the Irish Minister for EU Affairs. Lord Barwell, Gavin Barwell was number
10 Chief of Staff under Theresa May as she tried to secure a Brexit deal. He's
on the line now. Good evening. Good evening. Gavin Barwell, it's clear from what
Sammy Wilson was saying that there are still possibly some major hurdles ahead.
But watching today's press conference between Rishi Sunak and Ursula von der
Leyen, the tone seemed very different, the body language seemed very different.
What's changed, do you think? I think Rishi Sunak has taken a much more
constructive approach to his relationship with the EU and that has borne fruit.
I mean, there's a startling contrast between the way he has gone about this to
the way that Boris Johnson went about it. And I think there's a very clear
lesson for the Conservative Party, which is sort of playing hardball, going back
on your word, having people think that you're not ultimately trustworthy doesn't
get you anywhere in negotiations. Or is there another way? Could you reframe
that though by suggesting that playing hardball, by putting the Northern Ireland
Protocol Bill through the Commons, actually the British government almost wore
the EU down and it's the EU perhaps that's moved rather more than the British
government? Well, the EU has moved, there's no doubt about that. But the
compromises didn't come under Boris Johnson. The Protocol Bill when it was
introduced originally wasn't the thing that led to the EU shifting its position.
It's Rishi Sunak taking a completely different approach to Johnson that has
delivered the compromises that we've seen today, compromises that I think he
deserves huge credit for. And I hope, despite the rather worrying tone that
Sammy Wilson just struck with you, I hope will ultimately lead to the
restoration of devolved government in Northern Ireland. Do you think the
Conservative Party has changed? Clearly, Boris Johnson's a very different
character from Rishi Sunak. But Theresa May, she struggled to make progress. So,
I think if you're comparing where Rishi's got to with Theresa, I think there are
three big differences. The first is he's got a clear majority in Parliament, she
didn't have that. And that really counted against her in the negotiations
because the EU are sometimes in private explicit with us about that, that they
weren't confident that if they gave her an extra compromise, it would actually
get the deal over the line anyway, that she wouldn't have the numbers to get it
through. So, that I think makes a difference. And then I think there are two
other more recent factors, one of which Peter Burke just identified for you. So,
I think the decision Rishi Sunak made to share the live customs data was
absolutely critical because it gave the EU confidence that their own single
market, that the risk to the single market from the movement of goods from Great
Britain to Northern Ireland was very, very low. And then I think that in
addition to that, they've clearly seen the damage that has been done by this
version of the protocol to the Northern Ireland peace process. And they shared
with the British government a desire to try and come up with a compromise that
might entice the DUP back into government. So, I think those are the three key
differences from the original negotiations, you know, three or four years ago
now. How much danger is there ahead for Rishi Sunak if the DUP really are
resistant? They clearly have very serious concerns. If they hold out, if this
process is strung out, what does that mean for Rishi Sunak's leadership? So, I
don't think it's a danger for Rishi Sunak. I mean, the danger to him would have
come if large numbers of Conservative MPs weren't on side with what he's done.
And I think the reaction you've seen today from the Conservative Parliamentary
Party is pretty strong, actually pretty positive behind what he's achieved. But
clearly, as Chris Mason was saying to you, one of the key things, I think Rishi
has got two key objectives here. He wanted to improve our relationship with the
EU, stabilise that, get that on better terms. He's achieved that. But he also
wanted to get devolved government back in Northern Ireland. And if the D, I have
some sympathy with the DUP. I understand why they don't like Northern Ireland
being treated differently. That's why I favoured a different version of Brexit
that tried to treat the UK the same. But they're not going to get anything
better than this. This is as good as it's going to get for them. And if they
refuse still to go back to government, then I think politicians are going to
have to think really hard about changing the arrangements that we have in place
in Northern Ireland because we cannot allow a situation where for years and
years Northern Ireland doesn't have any function in government. But that's not a
runner, is it? I mean, that would jeopardise the entire basis of the peace
process. Well, you know, I've seen a number of people have already written
articles suggesting that we might have to look at that because what's the
alternative? I mean, you either govern Northern Ireland from London, direct
rule, which is going to have very damaging consequences, or you just allow a
prolonged period where there is no government of Northern Ireland. That's not
acceptable to allow that to happen. And just finally, one other person who has
been conspicuous in their absence in some ways today, Boris Johnson. If there is
the support that you describe on the backbench of the Conservative Party, is his
comeback a dead end in water? Well, I would hope that wasn't something that was
remotely being considered anyway, given all the issues that we're all very well
aware of about his record when he was Prime Minister in the past. But I think
what we've seen today should give Conservative MPs confidence in Rishi Sunak's
leadership. He's understood the detail of this issue. He's taken a completely
different approach and it has paid dividends in terms of the agreement he's
reached. Gavin Barwell, Lord Barwell, thanks very much. The headlines so far in
the world tonight, Eurosceptic Conservative MPs and Democratic Unionists are
studying the detail of a new deal with the European Union governing post-Brexit
trade in Northern Ireland. Down to earth, passionate and formidable, Betty
Boothroyd, the first and only woman to serve as Speaker of the House of Commons
from 1992 to 2000, has died at the age of 93. Here she is upbraiding the
Conservative MP, Ian Duncan-Smith, who wants to intervene in a Commons debate
between the then Leader of the Opposition, Tony Blair, and the Prime Minister,
John Major, in the run-up to the 1997 election. Order, order, order, order. I've
just made it clear to Mr Duncan-Smith that the Leader of the Opposition is not
giving way and yet since I made it clear he has been on his feet three times
trying to intervene and to disrupt. Order, order, order. I haven't finished, I
haven't finished, I have not finished this yet. The Leader of the Opposition has
made it clear he's not giving way. It is the custom in this House, once that has
been clearly stated, that honourable members do not go on pressurising. Betty
Boothroyd in full action there. Lord Blunkett, David Blunkett, was a Labour MP
who went on to be Education Minister in the Labour landslide that followed the
1997 election. He's on the line. Lord Blunkett, Betty Boothroyd, something of a
performer. She'd once been a tiller girl, a professional dancer. Do you think
that background, along with that extraordinary commitment to politics, serve her
actually rather well as Speaker? Very much so. She was a Yorkshire lass. She
worked for another Yorkshire lass, Barbara Castle. I experienced the rough and
the smooth end of Betty's tongue, both as a Shadow Cabinet Minister between 1992
and 1997 and then in government until she stepped down. A very real, respected
character. People have called her formidable. I would call her fierce as well as
fun and fair. And there's another character who's standing down tonight who's
been a great professional broadcaster, who's brought great pleasure to so many
of us, both listeners and contributors. We'll come to that. And we'd like to say
thank you, Ritla, to you. David Blunkett, thank you. But let's stay on Betty
Boothroyd for a moment longer, if we may. What do you think? Did she change the
nature of the role of the Speaker, do you think? And did she change the way the
House of Commons operated? Maybe not fashionable to say so, but I think she got
away with things because she was a woman and because she was fearless. And she
could actually put people in their place in a very strong, but I think often
very fair way. And people understood and accepted that. And it was really a
breath of fresh air from, gosh, I oughtn't to say this, the stuffed shirts of us
men in the past and did break the mould. And she was a mould breaker in all
kinds of worlds. I mean, a teller girl, a secretary at the roughest and most
difficult times with Barbara Castle. Those who are too young to remember won't
know that Barbara herself was formidable and fierce, just like Betty. An
extraordinary woman. And, you know, lovely to remember her on the day that she's
died, aged 93. Well, David Blunkett, stay on the line, because as you've already
intimated, this evening marks my final edition presenting The World Tonight. And
I want you to be part of a conversation we'll have in just a moment about the
events and the tumult that's marked the 15 or so years that I've been a regular
presence at 10 o'clock on Radio 4. Here's an audio scroll through the years
beginning in 2008. The bad times on Wall Street, Lehman Brothers files for
bankruptcy as the latest and biggest And on today's World Have Your Say, we're
going to talk about Greece, because the Greeks have been told if they pass
austerity measures next week. The Arab Spring began in Tunisia, where
demonstrations were sparked by the death of Mohammed Bouazizi. It's a harrowing
image splashed across many front pages in Europe. The tiny body of a Syrian
toddler washed up on a Turkish beach as his family sought a new life in Europe.
If we had a case that we felt we could prosecute, and my experts felt we could
prosecute against Harvey Weinstein, we would. We start now with some breaking
news. Reports are coming in of an attack, or quite possibly several attacks in
Paris. I've just received a call from Secretary Clinton. She congratulated us,
it's about us, on our victory. 20 minutes to five, we can now say the decision
taken in 1975 by this country to join the common market has been reversed by
this referendum to leave the EU. The British people have spoken and the answer
is we're out. Good afternoon. This morning I went to Buckingham Palace and I am
forming a new government. We should take comfort that while we may have more
still to endure, better days will return. We will be with our friends again. We
will be with our families again. We will meet again. Taliban forces entered the
heart of the Afghan capital, Kabul, today, the culmination of a... This is no
longer a climate conference. This is now a global north greenwash festival, a
two week long celebration of business as usual and blah, blah, blah. This is BBC
News, I'm Lise Doucette live in Kiev. These are the headlines now in the UK and
around the world. Russia has invaded Ukraine. Well, how time flies. Joining me
to discuss some of the dramatic shifts that have occurred since 2008 are David
Blunkett, who has been a member of the House of Lords since 2015 and was a
former cabinet minister under Tony Blair. Also, Martin Wolf, chief economic
commentator at the Financial Times and Karen von Hippel, director general of
RUSI, the Royal United Services Institute think tank. Welcome to you all. We
picked 2008 not only for mad, egotistical reasons on my part, but also because
of two events that many people would argue still have resonance today. I'm going
to begin with the more obvious one, Martin Wolf, and that's the financial crash.
It felt like a crisis as we lived through it. But do you think that governments,
including our own, actually grasped how far reaching its effects might be? No, I
think the obvious truth is they didn't. And in a way they couldn't. It was
obvious that it was a huge financial crisis. And I have to say they responded to
the event with extraordinary force and vigor and prevented it from becoming
another depression. What they didn't know, I think, was two things. First, that
they were about to make a serious mistake by tightening fiscal policy too soon
and too much. What does that mean? What does that mean? What it basically meant
is that they cut spending dramatically. They also raised taxes. So they took a
lot of the demand out of the economy that was needed to ensure a strong
recovery. And that, I think, further aggravated the inevitable impact of the
crisis on longer term growth and productivity. And in pretty well every major
developed country, subsequent growth after the crisis has never fully matched
what it was before the crisis. And so this has been particularly severe in this
country, but it's also true elsewhere. So it's turned out that the financial
crisis was not just a huge financial crisis and a shock and indicator of what
had gone wrong in the financial system, but it was also followed by, well, 15
years of rather weak performance. David Blunkett, I wonder how much of that
analysis you share. And do you agree that it's a failure which ultimately is
perhaps undermined financial stability? Which ultimately is perhaps undermined
faith in governments and indeed in democracy? Yes, the immediate reaction of the
G20 in 2009 was very impressive. The austerity measures, I believe, led
inexorably to a contribution towards Brexit, towards the rise of Boris Johnson.
The freezing, as Martin was describing on radio far earlier this morning, in the
United States of living standards had a major impact on the rise of Donald
Trump. And taken together with Syria and people movements, migration and the way
in which that was seen and impacted across Europe led to again to Brexit and to
the consequences we've seen since. Obviously, the Ukraine and the incursion of
Russia and the pandemic are two quite separate things, but you can see the
interreaction, interrelationship of those other events over the last 15 years.
Karen von Hippel, the other reason that 2008 really interests me, it's also the
year that there was another fateful decision. Ukraine and Georgia were promised
NATO membership. Russia invaded Georgia later that year. Lord Robertson, who was
then Secretary General of NATO has written, it wasn't NATO's cleverest decision.
Would you agree? Well, I mean, can I join Lord Blunkett first and just say how
sorry we all will be to lose your voice every evening, Ritula? You know, it's a
very interesting conversation. I think when you look back, you can often say
that with benefit of hindsight, you know, this is one of the first steps where
we didn't push back on Russia. You know, then it was later in obviously when
when the Russians invaded Crimea, when they went into Syria in September 2015.
And then, of course, you know, more recently, the attacks in Ukraine. But I also
agree with what the other two speakers were saying about that the financial
crisis, along with the Iraq war, really did lead to the rise of populist leaders
and publics that were no longer feeling that their governments were serving
them. How would you say that the security situation more generally has been
transformed over that period? Clearly, our perception of Russia has changed
dramatically. But you've also seen the rise of China. Right, we are in a more
multipolar world. It's not necessarily that the US is weaker, but other
countries are getting stronger. And smaller countries can also cause a lot more
trouble than than we might have thought in the past. You don't need necessarily
nuclear weapons or tanks, they can help. But there are a lot of other ways to
disrupt other countries, disrupt economies. You know, we saw with the so-called
Islamic State, a non-state organization, how much mayhem and fear they were able
to cause just with a few attacks in different countries. And so we are dealing
with a much more complex environment. There's no longer the two blocks that we
had in the Cold War. At the moment, we have Russia and China forming a block.
You have the West as another block, and then you have the so-called rest, you
know, in different points along that spectrum. Martin Wolf, what do you make of
this remodelling of the world and in a sense, perhaps the slowness with which
the United States, Europe, to some extent, have perhaps grasped that actually
power may be shifting? Well, I think it is always very difficult for hegemons to
get used to the change in their position. And the rise of China in particular is
obviously an enormous event. I would add that apart from the other economic
event we just talked about, the financial crisis, there's one other, in itself,
there's one other consequence which links with this, which is very clearly an
end to the period of rapid globalisation, of integration of economies. That was
replaced with a period of what some people call slobalisation, which is not
advancing. But recently, we're seeing a real pressure to decouple in many
different ways, in very complicated ways. Nobody knows how that will end. But
this is a very powerful economic force, which reinforces the growing mutual
suspicion of the West on the one hand and China on the other. I think that's
pretty well the biggest economic and political event of our current era. David
Blunkett, decoupling, growing mutual suspicion. What effect do you think that
has on the health of democracy in general? I think we're in a very dangerous
place. I think that the understandable desire for food security, for technology
security, and for personal security is leading us to look very inwardly,
insularly. And the way in which we're dealing with China, I think, is frankly
inept, and very short sighted. And we're taking our eye off the ball as well in
terms of the positioning of major countries like India, which will have the
largest population in the world very shortly. What would be a better way though,
to handle China, do you think? Well, we need a degree of sophistication, which
we haven't had in international, never mind domestic politics for some
considerable time. Clearly, you have to be tough where you need to be tough. But
you have to also understand that your interests lie in getting some sort of
understanding and repression back, which we thought we'd got in terms of the
World Trade Organization, when you first started with this program, Ritla. And
unfortunately, we're going backwards. And I fear that leadership in the world is
at its, probably at its worst for a very long time. My only consolation to all
those listening is if you take a look at the first half of the last century,
you'll realize we can get out of this mess. And we can get out of it in a better
state than by 1945. Karen von Hippel, do you think there would be a better way
to handle China? And are we the victims of poor leadership? Or do we perhaps get
the leaders we deserve? Good question. I think that the US assumption about
China, which other countries have, in a sense, followed has been proven to be
mistaken. And that really was since Nixon's trip decades ago, when we thought,
well, the more we engage, the more they'll become like us. And they'll become
democratic and respect human rights, etc. And of course, that hasn't happened.
And so we do need a more nuanced relationship with China, and one that works. I
don't think that the US making these, you know, quite aggressive statements
towards China helps because it just makes China feel more pushed more in a
corner, turning more to Russia. But at the same time, I don't think we've ever
really figured out how to deal with Russia either. I mean, we've tried with both
of these countries, you know, soft approaches, hard approaches, behind the
scenes approaches, overt approaches, and none of them have worked. So I agree
with Laura Blunkett, we do need a more nuanced policy on China. I'm not entirely
sure what it looks like. And I'm not sure how easy it is to explain not only to
the Chinese, but also to domestic populations, many of which US here and
elsewhere, often want their political leaders to be very tough on China and use
China as a, you know, a rod to beat the political opposition. Martin Wolf, the
China question, Karen von Hippel was describing the new division in the world
where you get sort of Russia and China on one side, Europe and the US on the
other with a few other democratic allies in the form of perhaps Australia and
Japan, and then the global South choosing where to place itself, and perhaps not
choosing the side that the West may have expected. How significant do you think
that realignment is going to be? I think that the what you call the global
South, which is of course, a very complicated network of very, very different
countries, which contains if you exclude the West and China, about two thirds of
the world after all, is going to try with very few exceptions to avoid taking
sides. They will mostly most of the countries I know anything about, they will
want to trade with both sides, they will want reasonable relations with both
sides. Some of them will like an American, many of the Asian countries will like
an American presence in Asia as a balancing factor against China. There's no
doubt about that. So they will be playing both sides in that sense, but they
really won't want a war. They want to be allowed to trade, they want to be
allowed to prosper. And they don't see why these emerging Cold War rivalry,
whatever it is, should get in the way of that. And right apart from that, they
know, as Lord Bunkett said, that we have some very big global interests in
common, including managing climate change, obviously, managing the world
economy, so it doesn't actually break down completely. And so I think they're
going to take the more nuanced position on all this. And I hope they succeed.
Well, perhaps there's a reason in there somewhere to be cheerful. Martin Wolf,
Chief Economic Commentator at the Financial Times, Karen Von Hippel, Director
General of RUCI and Lord Blunkett, Member of the House of Lords, thank you all
very much. Well, all that remains for me is really to say thank you, first of
all, to all of my colleagues for coming up with fantastic guests and ideas day
after day. They are the absolute unsung heroes of programmes like The World
Tonight. I also want to thank all the studio managers who push buttons and ride
faders. I'm looking at a couple of them just now, Graham and Jack. They make
sure we stay on air. Thank you to you. Thanks also to Gillian, the real
powerhouse of the office and also all the other admin staff who support us. I'm
not going to miss eating my dinner al desco, but I am going to miss the sense of
camaraderie with all of you in Radioland in particular. It's a really huge
privilege to do this job. For you to let me into your homes, your bedrooms and
bathrooms. Yes, I've heard it all. We've travelled the world together and tried
to make sense of what sometimes seem impossible and intractable situations and
stories. Thank you very much for choosing to come with me and with The World
Tonight. And finally, please keep supporting the BBC. It's far from perfect, but
it is an important part of what makes this country very, very special. Hang on
to it. So for now, from me, that really is The World Tonight for one last time.
From everyone on the programme, goodnight. And from everyone here in continuity,
Ritala, we salute you and we'll miss you. And what a pro finish spot on time
with able assistance from tonight's editor Anna Korochinska and studio director
Jack Raismark. Lem Sisse is the one and only. Are you that poet, Tony Walsh? On
Friday mornings at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4, we begin
Italo Calvino's Marcovaldo short stories, dramatised and narrated by Toby Jones
and starring Mackenzie Crook. Today's story is Mushrooms in the City. Every
year, spring blows into the city on the back of sudden swirling breezes. Breezes
that deliver unusual, invisible gifts. Gifts noticed by only a few sensitive
souls. Pollen blown in from the flowers of distant lands, crossing continents to
reach the avenues and apartment blocks of northern Italy, where crowds of men
and women crawl in every morning to the factories and offices that support them.
On one particular spring morning on a busy avenue somewhere on the outskirts of
the city, a gust of spores from God knows where had blown in and landed on a
narrow strip of ground where they'd sprouted in the dirt as mushrooms.
Mushrooms. Tiny. Just about to peep out from this scrubby patch adjacent to a
tram stop. And it was at this tram stop that a certain Marcovaldo waited every
morning. Of course, everyone else was too busy coming and going, pushing on and
off the trams to spot what he had seen. The signs that there, there, in this
sterile, neglected ground, lay... Mushrooms. But Marcovaldo did notice them.
Marcovaldo possessed an eye ill-suited to life in the city. He never seemed to
notice the billboards, traffic lights, shop windows, or even the neon signs that
had been carefully designed to capture his attention. But there were other
things he never failed to register. The sight of a leaf yellowing on a branch,
perhaps, or a feather momentarily trapped by a roof tile. In fact, there was no
flattened piece of fig peel splattered onto the pavement that Marcovaldo didn't
notice. He spotted these things, and in these fleeting signs, Marcovaldo
perceived not just the changes of the season, but the yearnings of his heart and
the woes of his existence. Mushrooms. It's... Unbelievable. Squatting to tie his
shoes, he took a better look. Yes. Yes. These little bumps at the base of the
tree had opened just enough for him to peek. Below the surface. Soft, round,
subterranean bodies peeping out. In that moment, the grey and wretched world of
the city seemed suddenly generous, as it revealed its hidden treasure. Hey!
Hurry up, hurry up, you're in the way! Come on, come on! These shades won't
sweep themselves! Yes. What? You're in my way. Right. What are you doing down
there? Nothing. My boot came loose. I was just... What? No, wait, wait, please,
please, I can't be late. Signore, signore, open the doors. Thank you, signore,
thank you, thank you. Marcovaldo looked out at the street sweeper, pointing up
at him. He squeezed himself into the crowded tram as it pulled away. He stood
there dazed until he got to his stop. Marcovaldo got off outside the factory,
Spav and Co, where he worked in the shipping warehouse. There he spent all day
every day unloading cases and packing boxes. But today was different. Today he
had seen something incredible. And today, something could still be expected from
life. Something beyond the hourly wage of his stipulated salary, with inflation
index, the family grant, plus cost of living allowance. Mushrooms, right here in
the city. On the job, he was even more absent-minded than usual. Distracted by
the prospect of what he alone had discovered. And the thought that even now,
back at the tram stop, below, in the darkness of the earth, the slow, silent
mushrooms were ripening their flesh. Breaking the crust of clodded earth and
dissimulating underground humors as they determinedly, minutely, pushed their
way upwards, little by little. One night's rain will be enough. Then they'll be
ready to pick. I'm hungry. Yes, I know. Me too. I know you are. Please, Papa.
I'm telling you, listen. Listen to me, kids. In one week's time, we will be
sitting here eating mushrooms. Mushrooms! Mushrooms! We will be frying
wonderful, delicious mushrooms right here, and you will taste the most wonderful
taste you can imagine. What's a mushroom? Oh, I know. Mushroom, mushroom. No,
no, no, no. Mushroom, mushroom, mushroom. Where's the mushroom, Papa? Ah, well,
you see, mushrooms are beautiful, Petruchio. Delicate, tiny packages of flavor.
They live under the ground, near the trees. But now, in spring, they pop up and
we can collect them and throw them in the pan to fry with just a little bit of
oil. It's a taste like you can't imagine. What is it like, Papa? It tastes of
the forest, of the wind and the rain and the leaves and the earth itself, all
parceled up together in these glorious little buttons of joy. You will love
them. Where can we buy them, Papa? I want one. No, no, no, no. No, they're still
underground. How do you know? Well, they're just about to sprout. You can see
the way the ground is shifting. But where, Papa? What? Where did you see them?
Where? Yeah, I want to go and find one too. Of course. Tell me where they grow,
Papa. I want to eat the mushroom. Well, you see, the thing is, the thing is...
The thing was suspicion. Marco Valdo was suddenly suspicious. He was worried
that if he told his children where the mushrooms were growing, they would tell
their friends and then they would go and hunt for them. And then their friends
would probably tell their friends and then their parents. And soon there would
be whole search parties, stripping the mushrooms, stripping the mushrooms that
he himself had discovered. Papa, where are the beautiful mushrooms? Mushrooms.
And so the discovery which had so inspired him that very morning, that had
filled his heart with universal love, elevating his soul above the sniffling
commuters squashed up against him, now suddenly made him possessive, jealous and
distrustful. The thing is that I know exactly where the mushrooms are and I'm
the only one who knows. And God help you if you breathe a word about them to
anybody. Next morning, Marco Valdo approached his tram stop with much
apprehension. He tried to appear nonchalant as again he reached down to tie his
laces. Then as inconspicuously as possible, he glanced over at the bumps of
earth protruding near the base of the tree. And by angling his head to one side,
he could just about see into the gap where, thank God, there they were. He was
relieved to see that they had grown just a little bit more. But luckily, they
were still hidden from general view. Loose boot again? Oh, what? Or have you
dropped something? No. Because it's amazing what people leave behind them, all
kinds of things. Really? You wouldn't believe it. Wouldn't I? You know, I once
picked up a silver cuff link. Just lying there in the street in front of
everyone, a silver cuff link. It's treasure, really. Is that right? Remarkable.
I know. That's the best job in the world. What is? Street sweeper. Oh, I can
imagine. Good day. That Saturday, Marco Valdo spent the whole of his afternoon
off patrolling the patch of dirt, keeping one eye on the ground and the other on
the street sweeper lurking further up the avenue. That night, Marco Valdo
struggled to sleep. It wasn't so much the sound of domotillos snoring beside him
or the restless murmuring of his six children as they nestled into each other's
arms across the floor. No, he was calculating, trying to imagine exactly how
long the mushrooms would take to ripen. How long before they appeared above the
ground, ready to pick, ready to cook and ready to eat with just a little bit of
oil, a sprig of garlic, perhaps, as they sizzle mirrorly. Rain. It's raining.
It's raining. This is it. Perfect, children. Wake up. Wake up. It's raining.
It's time to harvest. Keep up. Come on. Right, it's just up here by the stop.
Careful, careful. I can't see anything. Wait, look, look. Look. Where? Down
there. And there, by the tram stop, on the miserable little patch of brown
earth, there, just by the trees, a clutch of mushrooms had finally poked their
soft white caps up over the still damp earth. Everyone, kneel down. Now, very
carefully, let's start to pick them. Okay. One. Two. Yep, well done. Another
one. There's one. Make sure you pick them right at the bottom there. Pop them
into my hat. That's it. Good. Thank you. Papa. Beautiful, succulent, sweet
little mushrooms. You feel how they're still moist? That's because... Papa.
What? Look at all the mushrooms in his basket. Morning. Oh, yeah, morning. I see
you found some too. What? I see you're gathering mushrooms too. Uh, yes, I
suppose so. Why? You think they're all right there? Why? Oh, that's good to
know. Good to know. I picked this slop and I wasn't sure. Uh, where did you find
yours? Uh, down that end, but they're not like these. Huh? Oh, much bigger down
there. Whoppers? Whoppers? Anyway, uh, thanks for the tip. I'll tell my family.
They're all going mad up there arguing about who can pick what. Maricio! Papa,
what's a whopper? But Marco Valdo couldn't speak. He looked at the mushrooms
they'd collected in his hat. Tiny. And just down the street, there were bigger
mushrooms. Whoppers. Whoppers that he hadn't spotted. He looked up and saw the
street cleaner and his relatives down the road, jostling each other for the
bumper crop. Papa. Pathetic. Papa? For a moment, he was frozen. Angry. Furious.
And then, aware that people had started to gather at the tram stop, he looked at
his children, staring anxiously up at him. Then he looked back at the passengers
in their raincoats, grimly clutching their umbrellas, just in case the spring
showers returned to surprise them. Papa? And in that moment, as sometimes
happens, one emotion suddenly vanishes, only to be replaced by a new, generous
impulse. Good morning, everyone, and welcome to the tram stop today. Welcome to
the tram stop. Today, we have a surprise for you. Who likes mushrooms? Who, who
fancies fresh mushrooms tonight? There's plenty for everyone. Follow me. Come
on. Come on, follow us. And striding ahead with his children, he led the
bewildered, hungry passengers up the street to where the street cleaner and his
family were bent over, gathering in the spring harvest. And everyone found
plenty of mushrooms. And some of the passengers cheerfully unfurled their
umbrellas to use as baskets. And soon, people began to smile and chuckle as they
hunted and picked and chatted. Wait! Listen, everyone. You know what? We should
all meet up and have a great big feast. All of us, together. But in the event,
everyone simply took their mushrooms and went their separate ways. But as it
happens, everyone did meet up with each other again, much sooner than they'd
expected. Because most of the mushroom pickers ended up on the same ward of the
municipal hospital, where they'd been taken after the stomach pump had rescued
them all from poisoning. It was lucky for the harvesters that no one had eaten
very many mushrooms, so the stomach upsets were fairly minor. It was unlucky for
Marco Valdo that his hospital bed was wheeled through the ward and parked right
next to the streets.