TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The story continues at the same time tomorrow night. BBC News at 11 o'clock.
The Metropolitan Police has apologised for failing to arrest Wayne Cousins for
indecent exposure just days before he kidnapped and murdered Sarah Everard. The
former officer has been jailed for 19 months after admitting exposing himself to
women in Kent. Tributes have been paid to three people in their early 20s who
were found dead in a crashed car in Cardiff two days after they were reported
missing. Another woman and a man are in a critical condition in hospital. The
group were last seen on a night out in the early hours of Saturday. Their
families said they made repeated appeals to police to find them. The case has
been referred to the police watchdog. Downing Street says more safe and legal
routes will be open for refugees to come to the UK once arrivals in small boats
have stopped. The details are to be announced tomorrow of new legislation
preventing anyone entering the UK illegally from applying for asylum. Under the
plan, such people will be deported. But Madeline Sumption from the Migration
Observatory at the University of Oxford says it's unclear where they'll be sent.
The government has not indicated that they will be sending Afghans back to
Afghanistan where they could be killed, for example. They've said that they want
people to go to safe countries. But there aren't many of these countries queuing
up to take asylum seekers from the UK. There was a deal with Rwanda which isn't
operational, but even when it is operational it's only expected to have capacity
for a few hundred people. Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky says he's
instructed the army to find forces to bolster the defence of the eastern city of
Bakhmut, which has been bombarded by Russian forces for months and is now
virtually cut off. In his nightly address he said his top generals had
unanimously advised against a withdrawal from the city. And Brentford have kept
their long unbeaten run in the Premier League. They beat Fulham 3-2. BBC News.
There's a crisis in UK music education. In today's climate there's a lot less
funding available to support many young musicians who would like to pursue their
interest. I'm Soweto Kinch, a musician myself, and in a new three-part series
I'll be finding out why the future of British music is under threat. If you
don't have adequate provision in our schools that is going to have an impact on
the talent pipeline and it is going to have an impact in terms of the diversity
of that talent pipeline. Is it in danger of becoming an elitist occupation?
Rethinking music on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds starts tomorrow morning at 11.30.
We've all the day's news from Westminster with Susan Hulme in Today in
Parliament. That's coming up in half an hour. But now, a year on from the
invasion of Ukraine in 2022, James Nocte has been talking to key figures
involved in the recent history of conflict resolution. On the battlefield or in
the negotiation room, he's been investigating how wars end. We know freedom will
win. Victory and nothing less. We know Russia will lose. Volodymyr Zelensky in
London, as in Washington, was reassured again and again that there was a will
for his country to win. We should not sell the Ukrainians short. If we do, then
particularly Europe will have to constantly be looking over its shoulder. One of
the most powerful voices in the US Senate and a former British ambassador in
Ukraine echoes the thought. The prospectus that Putin has set out is so false
and his regime is so profoundly based in lies and deceit. Putin has basically
fabricated the agenda in this. But in Western capitals, the challenge is also to
see through the smoke of battle to what lies beyond. In this programme, we'll
talk about how wars end, if they do. Some never seem to. And others, against the
background of complete victory, end up creating a new problem, as with the
financial penalties imposed on Germany in 1918. Think of the end of the First
World War. We came up with an agreement that left a grievance on the German side
that was exploitable by Hitler, and he used it step by step to get back into
another war. And that will be the trouble here. If we leave a grievance without
trying to find a way of addressing it, then we will find ourselves fighting all
over again. A former Downing Street chief of staff, Jonathan Powell, on the
dangers. Because eventual victory for Ukraine, if that is the outcome, would
have to be embedded in a future that didn't promise new conflict. So I think
it's really important that what we all think about, because we all need to
support the Ukrainians in negotiations as we have in war, we and the Ukrainians
need to start planning for those negotiations now and start thinking through
what can be demanded, how it can be demanded, how the talk should be structured,
what you can do to find a way for the Russians to climb down a ladder. Those are
the sort of things that people who are successful in negotiations prepare for.
Other people just turn up and hope it will be all right on the night. The
negotiators. Somehow, someday, they'll have to balance the bitter fruits of war
and the rights and wrongs that the combatants will always feel in their bones
with the interests, the future security of those countries along the European
fault line that's opened up in the last year. Step into the world of conflict
resolution. Mark Muller-Stewart, KC, is a human rights barrister who spent many
years working with the UN in war zones around the world. Listen, for example, to
his account of how after years of destructive war in Syria, by 2016 the
Americans and the Russians nearly managed to get a military settlement. Barack
Obama's Secretary of State John Kerry and Sergey Lavrov, still Vladimir Putin's
foreign minister today, were the negotiators. I remember in the first round of
talks, they were desperate to move forward. But ultimately, we hadn't prepared
the ground properly. The parties hadn't actually moved beyond their positions to
actually negotiate their interests. And after two days, we took the difficult
decision with about 200 sort of media vans outside of the Palais in Geneva of
calling a halt to the talks. Peace talks in Geneva were supposed to stop this
bloodshed. But as we've seen many times before, the timetable of failed
diplomacy is actually increasing the agony of the people of Syria. We pushed it
straight back to Kerry and Lavrov and said we cannot begin to negotiate without
a proper ceasefire being in place. And therefore, they went to the Munich
conference one week later in February of 2016, and they got a national ceasefire
for about four or five months. So they began. There were four rounds of talks
and a secret channel between Moscow and Washington that eventually produced at
the end of the summer in 2016 a framework for peace talks. And then on the 9th
of September 2016, Kerry and Lavrov negotiated a military to military agreement
about disengagement and whatnot. And that was the background towards a framework
which we were supposed to present at the United Nations General Assembly. But I
don't know if you remember, but during that week, there was a hit by so-called
US defense forces killing Syrian soldiers. And then about two or three days
later, there was a hit on a UN convoy. More than 20 vehicles, 20 trucks full of
food. There's been international condemnation of an attack on a humanitarian
convoy in Syria, which has prompted the United Nations to suspend the movement
of all aid across the war-torn country. Obama, for once, put his foot down and
said we will only comply with that military agreement if we have the Syrian Air
Force grounded for seven days. Putin said he would only give three days. Zarif,
the foreign minister for Iran, saying why don't we cut it down the middle and
call it five. And they couldn't agree. And the then British foreign secretary
played a part too. And the next day, Boris Johnson walked into the Security
Council and gave a barnstorming speech against Russia. And three days later,
Putin carpet-bombed Aleppo. And that was the end of John Kerry's initiative.
There's such a thin line between success and failure. And what's a deal worth if
it doesn't have staying power? In Ukraine itself, there is recent history that
is telling. After the annexation of Crimea by Russia in 2014, the Minsk
agreements were meant to settle the conflict between Russian separatists in the
Donbass region in the east and the Ukrainian government then under President
Poroshenko. Simon Smith was British ambassador in Kiev at the time. We could not
be certain that Crimea was where this would stop. We were looking ahead at
eventualities which certainly included the possibility of the Russians actually
changing gear and going full steam ahead into a full invasion of Ukraine. The
peace deal's been brokered by France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine, desperate to
stop a conflict that threatens regional chaos. We now have a glimmer of hope. We
have agreed on a comprehensive implementation of the Minsk agreement. I don't
want to use a rude word, but I remember speaking to a very senior representative
of the Ukrainian government at the time and he said, Ambassador, I call this not
the Minsk peace agreement, I call this the Minsk peace of brown matter
agreement. There was a sort of air of kind of mutual incredulity. I got messages
from the Ukrainian government saying we couldn't quite believe why our French
and German friends didn't actually weigh in at this stage and say, hey, wait a
minute, this is going in the wrong direction. I had comments from the French and
Germans saying we couldn't believe that Poroshenko seemed to be happy to say,
OK, let's do this and get on with it. It's easy to look at the post 9-11 world
over more than two decades and identify more failure than success in bringing
conflicts to an end, whether in Iraq or subsequently in Afghanistan, where years
of NATO-led fighting against the Taliban and then an effort at what was called
nation building ended in a chaotic exodus and a Taliban regime in place. Robert
Fox is defence and security correspondent of the London Evening Standard and a
veteran foreign correspondent and military analyst. The agreements in Doha were
a disgrace. There were so many hidden agendas. It was a mishmash of diplomacy,
of military grandstanding. You were not looking at the facts on the ground. And
this is what the best of the Afghan commanders have warned us. We didn't see
what was happening, what Taliban capability was, and there was a failure. And
there was a fatal mistake, is that some of the main protagonists were just cut
out of it, namely Ashraf Ghani, the president at the time. And when Western
troops left after nearly two decades, it was to leave a mission unfulfilled. In
many ways, an emblem for the post 9-11 landscape that includes Russia's regional
wars in parts of the former Soviet Union, most of them unresolved after years of
fighting. Tim Foxley worked there as an intelligence analyst for the Ministry of
Defence in London. It's something like the Caucasus, where the goal would be to
keep an unpleasant frozen conflict, which you can stoke and perpetuate almost
indefinitely. You know, we fought a war with Georgia in 2008 and we still have a
frozen war, which people don't really pay much attention to now, but it's still
a frozen conflict. I don't think people realise this, but in Georgia, the border
between South Ossetia and Georgia expands every so often. You know, once in a
while, a poor Georgian farmer wakes up and someone's moved the border a few
hundred metres further in overnight, and he wakes up and he's now in South
Ossetia. So there are lessons from Afghanistan and from these suppurating
conflicts in Eastern Europe, of which London and Washington in particular are
painfully aware. Capitol Hill, Washington, the destination for President
Zelensky's trip outside Ukraine. In December, he addressed both houses of
Congress to stiffen their sinews. He came here not so much to bask in adulation,
although there was plenty of that, but because for him, an American will for
Ukraine to win remains everything. Well, I want you to know, President Zelensky,
the American people have been with you every step of the way, and we will stay
with you for as long as it takes. When Joe Biden was told a year ago this month
that American intelligence was convinced that Vladimir Putin would invade
Ukraine, we know, because the documents have since leaked, that the military
joint chiefs of staff were concerned above all that any conflict should be
contained in Ukraine's borders. Anything else risked a direct American-Russian
confrontation, a greater risk of a nuclear exchange, and the phrase that no one
likes to use but always hangs in the air, World War Three. You can still see the
power of the argument in Biden's decision last month not to send F-15 fighters
to President Zelensky. Just imagine Russian and American fighters in direct
combat over Europe. So yet again, an American president tries to balance support
for a country that's been invaded with the ever-present fear of future conflict
on an unimaginable scale. One of the Senate office buildings in the shadow of
the Capitol Dome, home to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Unlike a
backbench parliamentary committee, a key component of American foreign policy.
The chairman is a Democratic senator, Robert Menendez of New Jersey. You have to
be able to ensure that a peace agreement can withhold the test of time.
Something that is just to save the moment is not something that is going to
ensure the future. You have to set the ground for a more lasting peace, even
though that may be more onerous to get to. But behind the rhetoric stirred up by
President Zelensky's visit, the will to win slogan, there is an undercurrent of
dissent, not very loud, but persistent. And it's getting plenty airtime and
right-wing outspoken. It's getting plenty airtime and right-wing outlets like
Fox News, Congressman Matt Getz. I'm here as a member of the House Armed
Services Committee to say that the days of endless cash and military materiel to
Ukraine are numbered. And perhaps the most raucous Trump loyalist among House
Republicans, Marjorie Taylor Greene. We've watched tens of billions of dollars
be sent to defend another nation's border that is not our own. Every single day,
our border is invaded by people from foreign lands and also by drugs. I sat down
with one of Joe Biden's closest buddies on Capitol Hill, the Democratic senator
Chris Coons of Delaware, who sits on the Foreign Relations Committee under Bob
Menendez. I think America's will to support Ukraine, to support our vital NATO
allies, and to ensure that Putin and Putin's Russia loses is strong, is broad,
and is deep. There are, of course, voices on the far right and far left that
question the amount we've invested now at about $100 billion. But I have no
doubts that this year and likely the next, we will continue our strong support
of Ukraine. Do you fear that the isolationist urge in this country is still a
force to be reckoned with in the American psyche? It always has been. America
first is not a slogan new to Donald Trump. There was a movement in the United
States to prevent our entry into the World War as a result of a deep sense of
post-World War I isolation. And as you know, as FDR and Churchill were speaking
regularly about the urgency of our coming to the defense of the United Kingdom,
there were mass rallies in the United States saying, you know, America first,
stay out of another war in Europe. Former President Trump, I suspect, will
sharpen the focus on the question, why are we spending so much defending
Ukraine? He may well run with that as one of his principal platforms, and that
would encourage Putin and sustain his engagement in this conflict. It's a
complication for the Biden administration and one that's certain to loom large
when serious talk of a settlement begins. President Zelensky has repeated this
weekend that he has no trust in Putin and there is no possible deal that would
allow Russia to retain a foothold in Ukraine. Though Moscow insists it must and
it will. Looking on, Senator Menendez says the terms of any settlement have to
be in Ukrainian hands, but he's careful to acknowledge the room for negotiation,
knowing that red lines have a way of turning pink. Well, I don't think Putin
should be allowed to retain anything that he illegally annexed, and Crimea is
part of that. Of course, again, it will be for the Ukrainians to decide how much
blood and national treasure they're willing to continue to engage. It's not a
question of does Ukraine win, although winning will be defined by the
Ukrainians, but it is about can the Ukrainians be seen in a strong position to
be able to negotiate a peace that can hopefully be enduring. And that means we
must continue to support them and there will be conflict for a longer period of
time in order for them to be able to get at least to where they were prior to
the invasion. The question of Crimea is still outstanding, but that may be a
moment for a negotiation. I took the short walk from the Hart Senate Office
building and Senator Bob Menendez to the Heritage Foundation, the Reagan-era
center for the arts and culture of the United States. The Reagan-era think tank
that's become the crucible of conservative policymaking, to speak to Victoria
Coates, who served in the engine room of foreign and security policy in the
Trump White House, serving under four national security advisors, all of them
short-lived. From a US perspective, our two basic red lines, the things that we
want to avoid are, A, doing it again, so preventing Putin from being able to go
take a bite out of a Baltic is basically how we want this to be resolved, and
then preventing the use of a nuclear weapon in Europe. I don't care what scale
it is. It's a small nuke, doesn't matter to me. It's a nuke. We can't be using
them in Europe. We can't normalize their use. Unfortunately, I think Putin has
been watching sort of the normalization of the use of chemical weapons in Syria
for the last 10 years, so he's toying with this possibility. So I would make it
abundantly clear to our friends in Beijing that if they do not stop him and they
have the means to do it, they can just cut off the money, they will be seen as
complicit, and everything that then rains down on Putin is going to rain down on
them as well. In terms of settling the future of Ukraine as a sovereign country,
do you think that Ukraine needs to be seen to have won the war, or do people
start to think about deals before that moment? Well, I'm quite sure everyone is
already thinking about deals, but I do think it's very important that Ukraine is
seen to have won the war and Putin is seen to have lost. Right now he's thinking
he can't leave Ukraine and survive. I think we need to get him into the mindset
of you can only survive if you leave Ukraine, because your international
isolation, the pressure on your economy is going to be such that it will be
unsustainable, and maybe that's the off-ramp to him. Whether it's a question of
sanctions or some kind of postponement of a settlement on Crimea, you can't
speak to anyone who's concerned with the diplomacy of this war who isn't
thinking about where the exits are for everyone, even while talking about the
importance of victory. For Senator Chris Coons, the Ukrainians must be allowed
to state their terms, but he acknowledges that an eventual solution might have
to accommodate some Russian presence. If it is just in Crimea, if Crimea's
status is still unresolved, I do think the rest of Ukraine could continue as a
sovereign nation effectively, but Crimea is a part of Ukraine, and the decision
about when or whether to negotiate some distinct status for Crimea or some long-
term arrangement around the Russian naval base at Sevastopol, that's a decision
for Ukrainians. No war is quite like another, and nor is the peace. As well as
having been British ambassador in Ukraine, Simon Smith ran the embassy in South
Korea with a grandstand view of one of the strangest frozen borders in the
world, the focus of a superpower deal after the end of the Korean War in the
early 50s. You've had a 70-year armistice in Korea, but what you've not had is
70 years of a quiet, calm border where the likelihood that a confrontation will
break out again can be assumed to be low. I think you can look back and say
those were relatively peaceful, quiet years on either side of the demilitarized
zone in Korea, but what you've had is a sort of inherent instability which is
still unresolved. And I think unless there is quite a change in the aspirations
and the objectives of Russia in particular, then I think yes, you are looking at
a potentially unstable situation. When I come back to this, it'll need to be
addressed by the question of what credible solid security guarantees you put in
place. In other words, sticking plaster doesn't work. Sticking plaster can work
if you put industrial-grade sticking plaster on a problem. It can be among the
less bad of the approaches to it. Anyone involved in post-war negotiation, or
more generally what we now call conflict resolution, knows that there isn't any
simple formula. Time, trust, patience, they all play their part. Jonathan Powell
was number 10's man in the negotiations under Tony Blair that led to the Good
Friday Agreement in Northern Ireland in 1998. Negotiations to settle a conflict
are not technical negotiations. There's emotion, there is particularly trust
involved in this. You have to be able to build trust because you're dealing with
people who have been killing each other, often for generations, and you need
them to stop. And that doesn't happen by signing a piece of paper. Now we can
see the pictures there of Tony Blair and Bertie Ahern. Today is only the
beginning though. It isn't the end. Today we have just a sense of the prize that
is before us. So if we thought when we took off in our helicopters on the
morning of Good Friday in 1998 that we'd solved the problem in Northern Ireland,
we were sadly mistaken. It took us another nine years of negotiation to get the
Good Friday Agreement implemented. Mark Muller-Stewart, involved in UN
negotiations in the Middle East and Africa and elsewhere, picks up on trust and
the political weight needed to get it, as when the South African Minister of
Defence had to take a hand with outsiders who thought that they knew better than
the South Africans what might be needed in the post-apartheid reconciliation
talks. I once remember Ralph Meyer telling me that the Harvard School of
Negotiation landed in South Africa to help them think through their own peace
process. He told them to get on a plane and fly straight back to Harvard because
ownership was important, because we know from practice that all successful peace
processes are ones that are most inclusive. That's one of the lessons he's
learned and it's why at home in Scotland he spends a great deal of time working
on cultural exchanges as an adjunct to hard negotiating, because so often that's
how you build trust, which can come at the most unlikely moments, as when even
in Ukraine, after the Russian invasion, the UN Under-Secretary General for
Humanitarian Affairs Martin Griffiths, the kind of negotiator who's bound to be
in the thick of it after this war, managed to get a deal to let vital grain
supplies leave the country. I happen to be the senior advisor to the special
envoy in Sudan and I can tell you that that grain deal has literally saved the
lives of hundreds of thousands, if not millions of people in sub-Sahara Africa
and elsewhere. Let's take a look. This is the area where Ukraine has been
struggling to send its ships. And that has serious consequences. Odessa is one
of the key areas where grain is stored before being transported. And Ukrainian
exports are crucial to global food supplies. Moldova depends on Ukraine. But
that grain deal was put together through a series of contacts on both sides,
both in relation to Russia and in relation to Ukraine and in relation to Turkey,
who helped sponsor the whole deal, as a consequence of all sorts of pre-existing
relationships that had been built up in relation to other conflicts. So even
some of the negotiations that had gone on in Syria helped, if you like,
negotiators on the grain deal get to the right people. You know, it's a
continuum, peacemaking. When you go to most successful peace processes, you will
see a whole range, a whole web of relationships that have been established and
often over a long period of time. The lessons are legion. But maybe the most
important is the most obvious. It's always a hard slog. The veteran
correspondent, Robert Fox. What concerns me here is that we mustn't fall for the
continuous commentary, the continuous editorial of grand strategy. We're not
talking grand strategy here. We are talking gritty, granular, contained
stratagems to stop a conflict. From his time as an ambassador, Simon Smith
agrees. There's a lot of immensely hard work that's going to need to be done.
What is it going to take to convince Ukrainians that even if only in an
indefinite sense that this this Russian nightmare that says at any time, if we
take it into our heads to invent another myth about Ukraine, Ukrainians will ask
at what point does this stop? What is the substance of the security to guarantee
that protects us against us in the indefinite future? As Jonathan Powell says,
it always takes more than a piece of paper. You think about, for example, the
Oslo Accords in the Middle East. Great agreement, everyone celebrated when they
were signed, but no one actually then put in the work to sell those agreements
and to implement them. And as a result, they fell over and we went back to an
even worse intifada than there had been before. And the problem was not solved.
So what I learned is the actual implementation of agreement when people actually
do things they've promised to do. That's when you begin to build trust. The
implementation is the key aspect of an agreement, not just the piece of paper,
not just the television cameras. When you sign an agreement, it's that bit
afterwards. That's where you build the trust. That's where you end the conflict.
Trust seems elusive. And Senator Bob Menendez, chairing the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee in Washington, insists that it doesn't come from weakness,
but strength. I asked him when. I hope sooner rather than later. But you're
asking me a question that has an indeterminable calculus, and that's the mindset
of Vladimir Putin. The question is, how do the Ukrainians militarily achieve
certain objectives that gives them the wherewithal to enter into potential
negotiations? That will take some time. How much? I'm not sure. But I do know
this. If I was a European, I would be all in. Putin will not end with Ukraine.
The sooner that we are all more resolute about our continuing support of
Ukraine, and that message goes not only to Putin, but it goes to people like Xi
Jinping, who's also making calculuses based upon what's happening in Ukraine.
It'll be a safer world as a result. We can't know how this war will end. There's
no template. Only the weight of experience that in success and failure tells us
that trust is earned slowly through time and with imagination too. Our War's End
was presented by James Nochbe. The producer was Kevin Corr. Whatever you're
looking for, we've got sounds for that. Tuners for topical conversation that
informs, challenges, inspires and really gets you thinking on Woman's Hour. Or
relax and unwind with the rich musical textures of the Mindful Mix. Or throw
caution to the wind and enjoy Friday night comedy whenever you darn well please,
like on a Tuesday or even not at night with the sensationally time flexible
Friday night comedy podcast. Music Radio Podcasts, listen on BBC Sounds. Now to
Westminster, where there's outrage on the Tory benches today in Parliament.
Order, order. Hello, this is Susan Hume at Westminster, where there's
conservative anger that the top civil servant who investigated Partygate is now
planning to work for the Labour leader. Does this not undervalue years of advice
and reports that she has given? Also after an inquiry says chances to stop the
Manchester arena bombing were missed, a local MP asks... Who has been held
accountable? Who is going to be responsible? And will this information be passed
on to the families? And a pharmacist is worried that people in England may only
get free prescriptions once they're old enough for the state pension. What does
the government expect to happen when people in their 60s decide that they can no
longer afford their prescriptions? But first, there's been a furious outcry from
Conservatives following the resignation of the senior civil servant Sue Gray
amid reports that she's planning to become the Labour leader's chief of staff.
Sue Gray held an investigation last year into Covid lockdown gatherings in
Downing Street while Boris Johnson was Prime Minister. Sir Keir Starmer insisted
that he had had absolutely no contact with her during that inquiry, but he would
not say when he first discussed the possibility of her joining his team. Sue
Gray is believed to be speaking to the watchdog, ECUBA, which advises on these
kind of appointments about taking up the role. In the Commons, the Speaker said
many Conservatives had asked him for the chance to discuss the affair. I was
quite surprised by the number of urgent requests. Well, no, I'm not surprised on
that. But I was surprised that they all have the same wording and the same
length of sentence. Can I just say to the House, whichever side it comes from, I
won't be moved by mass lobbying. And he asked MPs not to try mass lobbying
again. The Cabinet Office Minister, Jeremy Quinn, made the government's
displeasure at Sue Gray's actions clear. This is an exceptional situation. It is
unprecedented for a serving permanent secretary to resign to seek to take up a
senior position working for the leader of the opposition. He suggested the
normal rules whereby senior civil servants get approval via the watchdog ECUBA
to take up a new job had not been followed properly. The rules state that
approval must be obtained prior to a job offer being announced. The Cabinet
Office has not as yet been informed that the relevant notification to ECUBA has
been made. Labour's deputy leader, Angela Rayner, thought it was no surprise
that Sue Gray wanted to work for Labour. Rather than, Mr Speaker, a tired out,
washed up, sleaze addicted Tory government. She said supporters of Boris
Johnson, the MP for Uxbridge, were now using parliamentary time to indulge in
conspiracy theories. What will they ask for next? A Westminster Hall debate on
the moon landings? The bill of dredging the Loch Ness? Or a public inquiry into
whether the earth is flat? The biggest threat to the impartiality of the civil
service is the party opposite. But the Conservative former cabinet minister,
Jacob Rees-Mogg, said that Sue Gray's actions had smashed to pieces the idea of
an independent civil service. When we know that one of the most senior civil
servants in the country was conniving in secret meetings with the party of
opposition, and does this not undervalue years of advice and reports that she
has given? Her views on devolution, which were known constantly to be soft. Her
report into the right honourable member, the member for Uxbridge, which we now
know was done by a friend of the socialists. Does this not undermine all her
previous work? The Speaker intervening there. The Minister, Jeremy Quinn,
replied that the actions of Keir Starmer in approaching Sue Gray had put at risk
the perception that the civil service was impartial. But the whole civil service
must not be tarnished by one appointment. Speaking for the SNP, Kirsty Blackman
was glad he thought so. Ministers and secretaries of state would be nowhere were
it not for the constant hard work of the impartial civil servants. And it's very
important that the Minister talks to his backbench colleagues and ensures that
in making statements about individuals they are not tarring the entire civil
service. Labour's Barry Shearman thought the outcry was orchestrated, saying
he'd spoken to a Conservative that morning. Who said, I'm not going over.
They've been trying to get everyone here this morning. The whips are on a five
line whip. And the suggestion, Mr Speaker, they don't like it. The suggestion
that the civil service is upping arms is nonsense. This comes from the Prime
Minister and it comes from this shabby government. Only a few opposition MPs
spoke, but a forest of Conservatives were indeed on their feet to underline
their unhappiness. Many said ministers needed to be able to rely on civil
servants impartiality and discretion. Scott Benton was one. Now that Sue Gray,
with knowledge of the most sensitive details of government ministers, has agreed
to work in a political capacity for the leader of the Labour Party, how can the
government ensure that other ministers are protected from political stitch ups?
Others were suspicious about exactly when Keir Starmer had first approached Sue
Gray with a job offer. Here's Boris Johnson's former aide, Leah Neitchie. Seeing
as though the leader of the opposition seemed a little foggy somewhat to know
about dates today, it seems that perhaps the dates are being scribbled on the
back of a fag packet as we speak. The minister said he was sure Keir Starmer had
someone who looked after his diary and could clear up the questions about when
any meetings took place and what was discussed. Now the Home Secretary, Suella
Braverman, has told MPs that the government's revised counter-terrorism strategy
must focus on security, not on political correctness. She was responding to the
latest findings of an inquiry into the Manchester Arena bombing in 2017. The
head of MI5 has said he was profoundly sorry it had failed to prevent the
attack. David Cornock reports. Twenty-two people died and hundreds were injured
when Salman al-Baidy detonated his homemade bomb in the foyer of Manchester
Arena as crowds left an Ariana Grande concert. Olivia Campbell Hardy was 15
years of age when she went out that evening and didn't come back. She was a
beautiful, wonderful person. James Daly was Olivia's MP. He said that MI5's
admission that it missed a significant chance to prevent the bombing followed
shocking failures by the venue's owners and emergency services. The Conservative
MP argued that some of those who died could have been saved. Too often in this
place an apology from an organisation seems to be enough. Well it's not. People
died as a result of the actions not only of this bomber but of the gross
negligence of some of the bodies that I've been talking about. Who has been held
accountable? Who is going to be responsible and will this information be passed
on to the families? The Home Secretary Suella Braverman said the inquiry,
chaired by the retired High Court Judge Sir John Saunders, had concluded that
responsibility for the attack lay with the bomber and his brother. When it comes
to whether lives could have been saved, the government is of course incredibly
sorry. Sorry is a weak word, I understand that, for the people directly
affected. Our thoughts remain with them. But Sir John Saunders is also clear
that in his conclusion it remains quite impossible to say whether any different
or additional action taken by the authorities could have prevented the attack.
It might have done, it might not have done. She said ministers were doing
everything possible to apply the lessons learned. There would be major changes
to PREVENT, the programme designed to stop people becoming terrorists. It has
underestimated the threat of Islamist extremism which remains by far the biggest
that we face. Too often it has minimised the role of ideology in terrorism.
PREVENT will focus on security, not on political correctness. And its first
objective will be to tackle the ideological causes of terrorism. As Jonathan
Reynolds said that, distressingly, the attack had left so many children with
life-changing injuries. My constituents have never wanted this inquiry to be
about blame, but about being able to say that we will learn lessons, that the
response the country makes in future will be better and stronger as a result of
that. And he highlighted the report's findings that the bomber had twice visited
an ISIS recruiter in prison. Fundamentally what I want to know is if somebody
who has links to a country like Libya is visiting a non-terror offender in
prison that will be more closely monitored in future than it was in the past.
Suella Braverman said there would be greater scrutiny of terrorist prisoners.
The government's also promised a new law to ensure venues do more to keep people
safe. It's being named after one of the victims, Martin Hett. A Conservative
Mary Robinson demanded progress. This is really important because people want to
know that when they go into a venue they are safe. Whilst we're waiting for this
to come forward and I hope it can be brought forward quickly, would my
Honourable Friend tell me what conversation she's having and instructions she's
giving to venues to make sure that they start to act now? Suella Braverman said
a draft version of Martin's law would be introduced in the spring and high
quality advice was already available to venues. For the SNP, Murray Black
welcomed MI5's apology and asked the Home Secretary. What steps she's taking to
ensure that the security services improve in their communications and their
information sharing, as well as guaranteeing professional standards don't fall
short as they have done in this case? Suella Braverman said reviews carried out
since the bombing had recommended better exploitation of data and wider
intelligence sharing. Labour's Shadow Home Secretary Yvette Cooper said her
thoughts were with the survivors of the bombing. Many of them however still feel
they lack the support and the help that they need, even so many years after the
terrible, truly terrible things that have happened. Will she meet with survivors
of terror and will she look again as well at what further support can be
provided for those who lost loved ones and those who were hurt in that terrible
event? The Home Secretary said the government would legislate as soon as
possible to create an independent public advocate to support victims after a
major incident. David Cornick reporting. Now, the head of the UN's World Food
Programme has predicted unrest and migration across many countries in the coming
months as a result of food shortages caused by climate change, Covid and the war
in Ukraine. David Beasley, who is a Republican former governor of the US state
of South Carolina, told MPs on the Defence Committee that 48 countries had
experienced unrest after the 2007 financial crisis. But this was much, much
worse. So we expect to see more civil unrest and protests and riots over the
next eight to 12 months, along with the fact that the smallholder farmers can't
afford the fertiliser or the fuel or can't get it. And therefore this is going
to really complicate in the next six to 12 months. He said that until the world
found new sources of fertiliser, it would still be reliant on Russian supplies
or else there'd be hell on earth. He also told MPs that alongside trying to
mitigate climate change, we needed to help the worst affected countries adapt to
it or else populations would be on the move. He said the World Bank predicted...
Maybe over 200 million displaced by the year 2050 because of climate. And so
what I've been trying to help the leaders of the world understand is that while
you're debating mitigation, you better well get your focus on adaptation so that
many of these countries that are poor can at least have the tools and
techniques, the programmes they need to stabilise the population while you
resolve the bigger issue of mitigation, what's causing the climate to change. He
said rich countries such as the US and those in Europe needed to come together
rather than delivering aid piecemeal. You've got icebergs in front of the
Titanic and you've got a broken wine glass in the bar, a broken tea glass in the
ballroom. Well what do you think you ought to focus on right now? Well a lot of
times bureaucrats will have you focusing on the broken tea glass and right now
we need to be together, focused on the icebergs and we don't have enough money
for everything but food security is critical to the stability of every nation on
the planet. The Defence Committee is investigating the security impact of
climate change. A Conservative, Sarah Atherton, had a question. You've mentioned
worsening climatic events, increase in food and water shortages, mass migration
and with that will come increased political security, social tensions. So in
your opinion, what does that mean for UK defence? I think it's like General
Mattis said, if you want to buy more ammunition, cut strategic international
aid. David Beasley, Chief of the UN World Food Programme. You're listening to
Today in Parliament with me, Susan Hume. Still to come, an MP praises older
workers whom he reckons......tend to be more dedicated, tend to be more
reliable, tend to be able to spell. But first, Opposition MPs have complained
that long-awaited changes to special needs education in England won't come into
force for several years, leaving families to fight for what their children need.
The Minister insisted that improvements were already underway. Christina Cooper
reports. The message from MPs of all parties about the current provision for
children with special educational needs and disabilities, or SEND, was the same.
It's failing. As the Labour MP Alex Cunningham vividly explained. In my
constituency, children have waited months if not years for an education and
health care plan. Children waiting three years for an autism diagnosis. Anxiety
over schools which don't have the right provision for their children. Anger that
special needs children are excluded from misbehaving and left at home with no
support. A child has special educational needs if they have a condition or
disability which make it harder for them to learn than other children their age.
It might be a physical impairment such as sight loss or a developmental issue
such as autism. Many children with significant and long-term special needs have
an education, health and care plan or EHCP. A legal document setting out the
support they require. A Conservative Dean Russell complained that the system
involves too much bureaucracy. Carers and parents of those who need SEND and
alternative provision are often battling against the system. Their heart and
souls are in their children and when they find that they can't get provision and
support when they need it and are just facing thousands of reams of forms, it's
heartbreaking for them but ultimately it makes their life that's already
difficult even harder. The Education Minister Claire Coutinho said she held very
near to her heart the plight of parents. Who are really struggling with the
system. They know that their child only gets one shot at education and obviously
I think it's very stressful and it can be heartbreaking for them when they feel
like that specialist support is not there. So yes we will be streamlining the
EHCP plans, we're going to try and make it easier. We want families to spend
more time with their children, not doing paperwork. She was making a statement
about plans published last Thursday to improve the special educational needs
system. The Minister said the aim was to deliver a more positive experience for
children and their families. We know that the system has lost the confidence of
parents and carers. We need to regain that trust by improving the support that
is ordinarily available. She promised new national standards, 400 more
educational psychologists to boost early intervention and 33 new special
schools. She said the aim was to reduce the need for education health and care
plans by supporting more children with additional needs in mainstream schools.
The Shadow Education Secretary Bridget Philipson pointed out that many of the
measures wouldn't come into force for two to three years. New national
standards, new special school places, new standardised digital education health
and care plans, none of this coming online until a further 300,000 children with
SEND have left secondary school. So can she say what is the government doing
right now for the children in the system today? How can parents, carers and
families be better supported now for the children whose needs are currently
going unmet? And she said a Labour government would work with parents to get
this right. The minister insisted the government hadn't been waiting for the
publication of the improvement plan to take action. Not only have we increased
the amount of funding for the high needs block by over 50% in the last four
years, we've also taken schools funding to historic record real-time highs so
anyone who is in mainstream funding can also get additional support. The Liberal
Democrat, Muneera Wilson, also complained that the changes wouldn't be
introduced until at least 2025. Could I ask the minister what message she would
like to give to the parents and children in my constituency and right across the
country who have already been waiting too long and fighting far too hard to
access the support they need and are entitled to? The minister repeated the
answer she'd given to Bridget Philipson, that some improvements were already
underway. A Conservative, Brendan Clark-Smith, had a personal interest in the
announcements on special educational needs. There's another dyspraxic MP in this
house and one whose handwriting closely resembles Guy Fawkes's confession note.
Can I warmly welcome the statement from the minister? He said send support for
children varied across the country and it was vital to equalise provision and
end the postcode lottery. Christina Cooper there. A Labour former defence
secretary has warned that a growing reliance on advanced technologies means that
automatic systems could lead to an accidental nuclear strike. Lord Reid said
that on several occasions in the past, human override has averted potentially
catastrophic nuclear weapons use. But he argued there was an increasingly
complex interrelationship between systems and an increasing reliance on
artificial intelligence. So he wanted reassurance. That the highest priority is
being given to see that that human override, the decision by human beings, is
not being undermined by the complexity and the increasing use of autonomous
digital based systems when it comes to nuclear weapons. The Defence Minister,
Lady Goldie, tried to reassure peers that the government wasn't complacent about
the nuclear weapons or artificial intelligence. We will ensure that regardless
of any use of AI in our strategic systems, human political control of our
nuclear weapons is maintained at all times. And we strongly encourage other
nuclear states to make a similar commitment. The noble Lord will be aware that
while I can't go into detail, there are a number of very robust procedures that
would stop either an unauthorised intervention or a state intervention. Lady
Goldie. Opposition MPs have said it flies in the face of common sense to raise
the age at which older people in England can get free prescriptions. Currently
they're free from the age of 60. The government is considering the change, but a
petition opposing it has collected more than 46,000 signatures. Here's Mandy
Baker. The government hasn't yet made a decision on whether to align the age at
which people can start claiming free prescriptions with the state pension age.
But it has carried out a consultation. This would only apply in England. All
prescriptions are free of charge in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
Labour's Tonya Antoniazzi, who led the debate, said that with the cost of living
crisis, some people already couldn't afford to pay for their medicines.
Restricting free prescriptions further was short-sighted. One lady who lives
with kidney disease was hospitalised twice because she had to wait until payday
to collect a prescription. In hospital she had to have a lumbar puncture, an MRI
scan, costing the NHS thousands more. She said people suffering from certain
diseases were exempt from prescription charges. But apart from the addition of
cancer, the list of eligible illnesses hadn't been reviewed since 1968. And it
didn't cover some life-changing conditions. Parkinson's, arthritis, asthma,
Crohn's disease, cystic fibrosis, lupus or motor neurone disease. And this is
the tip of the iceberg. Those with these and other complex, lifelong conditions
still pay for their prescriptions. And for those with multiple co-existing
conditions, the cost is even higher. A recent survey by the Royal Pharmaceutical
Society found that more and more patients weren't collecting their medicines
because they couldn't afford the £9.35 charge for each item. Labour's Taiwo
Owatemi works as a pharmacist in a cancer unit. It really should not have to be
spelt out that as people age, they will develop long-term health care needs. And
these needs will need to be treated by prescription drugs. She suggested
increasing the age threshold would hit people with the greatest need for
medication but who were least able to afford it. So I would just like to ask,
what does the government expect to happen when people in their 60s decide that
they can no longer afford their prescriptions? Because if saving money is their
aim, I question whether they have considered a reality that these proposals will
simply shift the cost from primary care to urgent care where health conditions
inevitably worsen and patients are forced into overcrowded A&E units. Marian
Fellows from the SNP said England was out of step with the rest of the UK. For
more than a decade, NHS prescriptions have been free in Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland yet with the Tories in power in England for 13 years, they've
not replicated this approach, instead penalising those wishing to collect
medicine. No Conservatives spoke in the debate. Labour's Shadow Health Minister
Andrew Gwynne said a survey had found 15% of those with respiratory conditions
were rationing the use of their inhalers so they'd last longer and 5% of
patients were borrowing medicines from other people. Now these statistics
frankly should be causing alarm bells to ring in the Department for Health and
Social Care and for that matter in the Department for Work and Pensions. But
unfortunately we've had radio silence. If the MPs had hoped for a change of
heart from the government, the Health Minister's opening words didn't bode well.
I should start by trying to manage some expectations about what I can say today.
Neil O'Brien could say that by 2066 a quarter of the population would be over 65
and what's more... If we were to make this change around 85% of 60 to 65 year
olds would be minimally affected by the proposed change. As I've just noted more
than half of them are in employment, about 20% of them also are retired with a
private pension, have a higher income, while others would continue to qualify
for prescriptions on the basis of their particular conditions. He said ministers
would consider the responses to the consultation long and hard and the
government would make a decision in due course. Mandy Baker. Meanwhile more than
half of the over 50s think older people are left behind by employers according
to a report today from a savings and retirement firm. It also found only one in
seven think support for older workers is sufficient to encourage them to return
to work. The Labour MP Emma Hardy highlighted some of the other findings.
Research published by the Phoenix Group today on economic inactivity in the over
50s stated and I quote, flexible work, support with new technology and
opportunities to work from home are favoured support strands in people returning
to work. So will the Secretary of State back Labour's plan to make flexible
working a force for good for all workers? The government's investigating how it
can counteract what it calls economic inactivity, especially among the over 50s,
many of whom took early retirement during the pandemic or can't work because of
health conditions and disabilities. The Work and Pension Secretary Mel Stride
said new ways of working could help. Flexible working is the way forward, not
just for the over 50s but also often for those who have disabilities. This is a
big opportunity that we need to seize. Labour's Shadow Work and Pension
Secretary Jonathan Ashworth said many parents would return to work if they could
afford childcare. At the moment, many are expected to find hundreds of pounds,
sometimes a thousand pounds to pay for childcare costs up front. I mean, who has
a thousand pounds down the back of a sofa? Mel Stride told him he'd have to wait
a while to find out what the government's plans are, a reference to the budget
due to be unveiled by the Chancellor Jeremy Hunt next week. For the SNP, David
Linden accused the government of a punitive approach to the unemployed. Can the
Secretary of State come to the Dispatch Box and outline how plunging people into
poverty helps deal with economic inactivity? And doesn't the only activity it
stimulates is at local food banks? Mel Stride insisted that since 2010, absolute
levels of poverty had declined. Fewer children growing up in workless housing
homes, for example, in a distinct contrast to governments prior to my party
coming into office. On a lighter note, a Conservative, Michael Fabricant, who's
a youthful 72, thought the government should be extolling the virtues of mature
workers. Older people on the whole tend to be more punctual, tend to be more
dedicated, tend to be more reliable, tend to be able to spell. And Barry
Shearman, who was first elected to the Commons in 1979 and is currently the
longest serving Labour MP, wanted to add his voice. To this call for use of
talented people who are over 50. I'm approaching that stage myself, Mr Speaker.
And he said many people were waiting for a second chance to contribute to the
economy if they were given the right incentives. Before we go, our main news
again. A government minister has suggested that all the rules may not have been
followed properly after the resignation of the top civil servant, Sue Gray, to
join the Labour leader's staff. I'm Susan Hume. The studio manager was Danny
Cox. The editor was Alicia McCarthy. And that was Today in Parliament.