TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
...earth an epic corruption scandal in the fishing industry. This is the BBC
World Service, the world's radio station. This is the Newsroom with Alex Ritsen
on the BBC World Service. The count is now underway in Nigeria's election amid
reports of delays, violence and ballot snatching. There's nothing free and free
in this election. At all. There's been telling us that you are not able to vote.
I've stayed here since past 10 and this is past 3 and I've not had anything.
Outrage in Tunisia as the president claims illegal hordes of migrants are trying
to change the country's racial make-up. We're seeing really such racist backlash
following the president's speech against all black people to be on the... A
snowstorm in California as Texas swelters stand by for the battle for the first
major silverware of the English football season. It means everything to me to
make the Newcastle supporters happy, proud. You're playing for Manchester United
and you have to create your own legacy. And the mission to save the biggest frog
on earth. First, this news. Hello, I'm David Harper with the BBC News. The first
results from Nigeria's hotly contested presidential election could come later on
Sunday, even though some of the voting is still scheduled to take place.
Election officials blamed insecurity for a postponement in polling in districts
of Bayez and Saite. There were also reports of sporadic violence elsewhere. The
poll comes at a difficult time for Nigeria, as the BBC's Simi Jola Oso in Lagos
explains. This election has come at a time of crisis in the country. There are
several issues that are concerning Nigerians. One of insecurity, for example,
kidnappings have been rampant across the country. Islamist militant groups,
especially in the North and violent separatists in the South. There's the issue
of the economy. Inflation is over 20 percent at the moment. And most recently,
there's a cash crisis. People have literally been struggling to get a hold of
their money from the banks. The country and the sense in the country is one of a
need for change. A senior Ukrainian general has visited troops near Barmoot,
which has been the focus of months of intense onslaught by the Russian military
and Wagner group of mercenaries. General Olexandra Siyosky's trip coincided with
reports of advances in the area by Moscow's forces, Grand Ferret reports. Russia
began bombarding Barmoot in the eastern region of Donetsk last May. Since then,
much of the city has been reduced to rubble. Most of the population has fled.
Wagner fighters, many of them former prisoners, have carried out human wave
attacks, leading to huge casualties. In recent days, unconfirmed reports suggest
that Russia has advanced around to the west of Barmoot, raising the prospect of
Ukrainian soldiers either withdrawing or being encircled. They're said to have
destroyed a small dam in the hope of slowing Russian progress. In his nightly
address, President Volodymyr Zelensky praised the heroism of Ukrainian soldiers
in Barmoot. The European Union has announced additional sanctions against the
Russian-backed Wagner group for what it says are human rights abuses in several
African countries. The mercenary organisation was already sanctioned by the EU
in 2021. The European Council said it had listed eight individuals and seven
entities tied to the paramilitary group in the Central African Republic, Sudan
and Mali. Many newspapers in the United States have dropped the long-running
Dilbert cartoon strip after a racist outburst by its creator. Speaking on his
YouTube channel, Scott Ammes and Adams describe Black Americans as a hate group,
Greg McKenzie reports. Mr Adams had been responding to a poll which purported to
show that half of all Black Americans do not think it's okay to be white. He
told his followers that white people should, as he put it, get the hell away
from Black people. The comments have sparked outrage. The artist said they had
been taken out of context but acknowledged that his reputation had been
destroyed. BBC News A US Navy submarine has docked in the South Korean naval
port of Busan. Unusually, the arrival of the nuclear-powered USS Springfield was
announced on social media. Correspondents say the presence of the submarine is
probably intended to serve as a warning to North Korea, which has repeatedly
carried out weapons tests in recent months, raising tension on the peninsula.
The French president Emmanuel Macron has said that a long-delayed trade deal
between the EU and a group of four South American countries can't go ahead
unless they follow European environmental policies. The four Mercosur countries,
Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay, are all major agricultural producers.
Judges at one of Europe's leading film festivals, the Bey-Linala, have taken the
unusual step of awarding the top prize to a documentary. The winner was On the
Adamant, a French film about a floating daycare centre for people suffering from
mental illness. Its director, Nicholas Filippet, said he was delighted the
documentary had won the festival's famous Golden Bear. That documentary is
awarded and celebrated. That documentary can be considered to be cinema. In its
own right, it touches me deeply. For 40 years, I have always fought for it to be
seen as such. In another surprise, the Berlin Festival's award for Best Leading
Actor went to its youngest ever winner, eight-year-old Sophia Otero. She plays a
transgender child in the film 20,000 Species of Bees. Conservationists in West
Africa say their efforts to save the world's biggest frog are paying off. The
Goliath frog, which can grow to the size of a cat, has been hunted to near
extinction in its native Cameroon and equatorial Guinea. Five years ago,
conservationists encouraged hunters to turn to snail farming as an alternative
food source. New nesting sites have now been discovered in rivers and streams in
Cameroon. That's the latest BBC News. Hello, this is Alex Ritson with the
Newsroom. We start in Nigeria, where millions of votes are being counted
following Saturday's presidential election, the tightest race since military
rule ended in 1999. The results will be collated and sent to the electoral
headquarters in the capital, Abuja. But the final outcome of Africa's biggest
democratic exercise may take days to be confirmed. Voting was marred by long
delays in some areas as polling stations failed to open on time because of
logistical issues. Some remained open late into the night. There were also
scattered reports of violence and ballot box snatching. In Bailasa State, where
polling stations were attacked, voting has been postponed until later on Sunday.
Nearly 90 million people were eligible to choose the successor to President
Mohammedu Bahari, whose ruling APC is up against the main opposition PDP and a
relative newcomer, the Labour Party. Mayini Jones reports from Lagos.
Frustration and anger. Many Nigerians want to take part in this election, but
have been disappointed by the lack of organisation. Gang violence and threats by
militant Islamists have made voting difficult in some regions. And in this
polling station on the mainland of Lagos, electoral officials never even showed
up. There's nothing free and fair in this election. Most people that have been
party to this place, they've been telling the truth. They are not able to vote.
They are cancelling polling units all over this place. We have stayed here since
past 10 and this is past three and we have not had anything. We've tried to poll
them. Young urbanites who want better economic opportunities have been
encouraging each other to vote on social media and it seems to be working. In
Lagos, despite the lack of organisation, voters told us more people showed up
than in the last elections. Turnouts here in Lagos, Nigeria's most populous city
tends to be quite low. In 2019, only 18% of the electorate showed up. But here
in O'Balaanday, one of the city's neighbourhoods, people tell us that the
turnout is unusually high. At 6pm, three and a half hours after polls officially
closed, some polling units were only just opening. Having a third candidate for
the first time is an encouraging sign in a region where democracy feels under
threat. But whoever wins will have to deal with a struggling economy, high youth
unemployment and widespread insecurity. Ma'ini Jones, also in Lagos, is Mkechi
Ogbona who's been following Saturday's events. Some polling units I visited in
Lagos saw some armed people, others were marked, you know, some groups storming
these places, snatching ballot boxes, taking away election materials, harassing
electoral officers and even voters. I met a young woman, a doctor who was
injured, had a sprained ankle because she was attacked, her husband was bruised
as well and there have been videos as well on social media showing voters
bleeding but determined to still vote regardless of the threats that they've
experienced at their polling centres. Moving around Lagos and even other parts
of the country where all the BBC reporters have sent in reports of what they've
seen at different centres, voter turnout has been very impressive. We do not
have official figures yet as counting is still taking place but videos and
reports all around the country say voter turnout this year may be the most we
have witnessed in recent times. Mkechi Ogbona in Lagos. In the US some parts of
the East Coast including Washington DC are having their warmest winters on
record but on the West Coast it's a different story. This week people in
Southern California have had to contend with a rare but fierce winter storm
which has dumped large amounts of rain and snow and caused major disruption. I
got more details from our correspondent Peter Bose who's in Santa Clarita some
50 kilometres north of Los Angeles. This has been a huge storm. It's passed
through most of California over the last 48 hours actually heading out of Los
Angeles now towards the East. We've had a tremendous amount of mostly rain for
most people at the higher elevations of course a lot of snow as well and just a
sprinkling of snow in the city of Los Angeles and famously the Hollywood sign
has been covered in a little bit of snow where I live which is about an hour's
drive to the north of Los Angeles a slightly higher elevation here about 600
metres. We had a sprinkling again of snow a few hours ago a nice winter
wonderland for a little while but it has all since melted but there have been
some extraordinary stories of rescues of people getting caught in fast-moving
water and a lot of people at 1.120 thousand utility customers in California lost
their electricity supplies those electricity supplies are beginning to come back
I understand now in most regions but for most of us living here in California
this is very very unusual and I've got to say for a lot of people a novelty. So
it sounds as though it could have been a lot worse than it was and the forecasts
were certainly alarming but maybe it didn't play out but it is these are times
of weird weather across the United States aren't they? Well that's the unusual
thing about this that while here we are on the west coast and actually much of
the northern part of the country and the Midwest as well experiencing this
extremely cold weather and a lot of snow of course much further north in the
United States over the last few days whereas on the east coast they are
experiencing record or near record temperatures in states like Florida and
listening to what some of the experts have been saying about this it isn't that
unusual that across this vast country there could be these two seemingly and
clearly very different weather systems and people always wonder these days is
this linked to climate change and I think the strict answer to that at this
stage is it's probably too early to say especially linking the kind of cold
weather the extreme rain and some snow that we've experienced in Los Angeles
more directly to climate change I think you could talk about climate change over
the long term as to how it's affecting the weather here but perhaps not for this
very specific storm that we've had over the last few days. Peter Bowes in
California hundreds of Tunisians held protests in the capital on Saturday to
condemn a speech by the president attacking undocumented sub-Saharan migrants
chanting president of shame they accused Kais Saeed of making racist comments
and called on him to apologise on Wednesday Mr Saeed said sub-Saharan migrants
had come to the country in what he called illegal hordes the African Union
described his comments as racialized hate speech. Gaya Ben-Barrack works for a
publication called the National News my colleague Razi Iqbal asked her if
there'd been any response from the Tunisian government. The foreign affairs
ministry said that it found the statement astonishing and surprising and was
merely based on a misunderstanding regarding the Tunisian authorities position.
I also saw that Minister of Foreign Affairs Nabilah Martel that the statement
was a surprise especially that yesterday the ministry had convened several sub-
Saharan African countries ambassadors to assure them regarding the status of
their nationals. Of course the status of their legal quotation mark here
nationals in Tunisia so we're seeing that the the ministry and the authorities
are only saying that there was a misunderstanding regarding the statements of
the president. However we're seeing like really such a racist backlash following
the president's speech against all black people to be honest including Tunisia
we're seeing people like posting online testimonies of them getting attacked
verbally and physically in the street for being black. And how widespread is
that do you think? To be honest I'm seeing quite a lot an activist that I know
and a friend of mine was verbally attacked yesterday in front of the Ministry of
Interior verbally and also physically attacked for being black she's Tunisian
I'm seeing statements from sub-Saharan African migrants saying that they are
getting kicked out from their homes the embassy of Mali issued statements
telling their nationals that they will be organizing voluntary repatriation
trips for those who are seeking to leave the country during the current
situation. Journalist Gaia Ben-Barrack. Germany has become one of Ukraine's most
staunch supporters sending tanks and other military equipment to help the
country defend itself against the Russian army but not everyone in Germany
agrees with the stance taken by the government of Chancellor Olav Schulz on
Saturday thousands opposed to sending more weapons took to the streets of Berlin
our correspondent Jenny Hill was at the rally. They have come here in their
thousands to the heart of the city centre through some pretty nasty weather
conditions and they're here because they want to demand the end of the delivery
of weapons to Ukraine and they want an immediate start to peace negotiations.
That is not the current strategy of the German government of course all of this
has been organized by a couple of women one of whom is actually on the stage
behind me now addressing the crowds they have started an online petition with
those demands that's gathered well over 600,000 signatures so far. Germany of
course is a very particular country when it comes to foreign policy of this
kind. For so long this country has considered itself to have a special
responsibility following the atrocities committed in its name during World War
Two. Its foreign policy has been for decades one focused very much around
pacifism looking for negotiation trading links rather than any kind of active
involvement in military conflict. A year ago it would have been unthinkable for
this country to send weapons into an active war zone that is now what it's doing
and I mentioned the demographic of the people here they are by and large middle
aged and older. These are people who for decades have been used to that kind of
pacifist outlook in the space of a year all of that has been turned on its head.
Germany is now a country really profoundly considering its own role on the world
stage with a particular view to its military role on the world stage. There is a
lot of change going on, big debate going on today and a lot of people turning
out to make their views on the current situation very clear indeed. Jenny Hill
in Berlin. David Harper joins me here in the Newsroom studio with some of the
other stories the news desk has been looking at and David the row in Israel over
Benjamin Netanyahu's so-called legal reforms shows no sign of easing off. Yes
and the latest development in this long-running series of demonstrations is that
Israel's national security minister has now condemned the protesters who are
opposed to the government's planned legal reforms as anarchists, Itamar
Benghveer has accused demonstrators in Tel Aviv who started a fire on a major
road of going on an illegal rampage. He said that police should show zero
tolerance to rioters the organizers of the protests which took place in cities
across Israel so they were the biggest since the weekly rallies began two months
ago. A meeting in Central Asia which I suspect will annoy Vladimir Putin. Quite
possibly this involves the US Secretary of State Anthony Blinken who has now
said that he will travel to Central Asia later this week for a summit of foreign
ministers and this is going to involve five ex-Soviet republics lying between
Russia and China. Gathering is set to take place in the Kazakh capital Astana on
Tuesday and as you might imagine Ukraine is expected to be a key topic on the
agenda. David thank you David Harper with a round up of the other stories we've
been looking at today. The Goliath frog can grow up to 32 centimeters in length
and weigh up to three and a quarter kilos which makes it a victim of hunters but
conservationists in West Africa say their efforts to try to save the frog are
finally paying off. It's returned to the Mount Myonko reserve in its native
Cameroon. Our science correspondent Helen Briggs has this report. The Goliath
frog lives up to its name growing to the size of a large cat. It can jump up to
10 feet for the world's biggest living frog which is found only in Cameroon and
neighboring Equatorial Guinea is threatened with extinction and is classed as
endangered. The amphibian has been pursued by hunters for its meat and for the
pet trade. Its habitat in the rainforest is being fast destroyed but five years
ago conservationists in Cameroon set out to save the species by encouraging
local people to stop hunting the frog and report sightings of it instead. They
suggested snail farming as an alternative food source. Their scheme appears to
be working and new nesting sites have been discovered in rivers and streams.
That is a classic world service story, the world's biggest frog. You are
listening to the Newsroom programme. And that's where we raise a parting glass
to the world's surface and get the ovens going here at Radio 4 to get breakfast
service underway. It's 20 past five on Sunday the 26th of February. I'm Lisa
Costello and Louise Lear is at the BBC Weather Centre. The current tomato
drought is of course having a bit of an impact on our full fry but we'll have
the latest news briefing and full shipping update for you very shortly. First
though, a recipe for marital longevity. Joanna Lumley and Roger Alham are back.
It's been three years since we've had one. At what? A day without an argument.
In a comedy capturing the ups and downs of 40 years of marriage. You just don't
like being told what to do. Don't tell me what I like. There it is. They're
passionate about life. Do men ever entirely grow up? I think you know the answer
to that one. And each other. I do hate dancing but I love you. Oh. The new
series of conversations from a long marriage. Your 6.30 comedy for Wednesdays on
Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now let's get straight to Louise Lear at the BBC Weather
Centre. Thank you Lisa. Good morning. This is the shipping forecast issued by
the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 05.05 on
Sunday the 26th of February 2023. The general synopsis at midnight. High
Northern Scotland 1031 expected Cromartie 1037 by midnight tonight. Low
Trafalgar 1009 losing its identity. The area forecasts for the next 24 hours.
Viking. Northley or northwesterly four or five. Occasionally six in east.
Showers later, good. North at Syrah. South at Syrah. Northley four to six.
Showers later, good. Forties. Northley four or five. Occasionally six in east.
Showers, good. Cromartie variable two to four. Fair, good. Fourth. North three
or four. Showers at first, good. Tyne Dogger north or northeast four or five.
Showers, good. Fisher. Northley or northwesterly four or five. Occasionally six
in west. Fair, good. German Bight. Northley or northwesterly four or five.
Occasionally six at first in southwest. Fair, good. Humber. Northeast four or
five. Occasionally six at first. Showers, good. Thames. Northeast four to six.
Showers, good. Dover White. Northeast five to seven. Showers, good. Portland
Plymouth. Northeasterly five or six. Occasionally seven in south. Showers and
south, good. Biscay. Northeast five to seven. Showers at first, good. South
Fitzroy. Eastley or north-easterly two to four. Increasing five to seven. Fair,
good. North Fitzroy, sole. Eastley or south-easterly five to seven. Showers at
first, good. Lundy. East or northeast four or five. Occasionally six at first.
Fair, good. Fastnet. East four to six. Fair, good. Irish Sea. East or northeast
three to five. Fair, good. Shannon. East five or six. Vearing southeast six or
seven. Fair, good. Rockall. Southeasterly five or six. Occasionally seven later
in west. Fair, good. Malin. Southeast three to five. Fair, good. Hebrides. South
or southwest three to five. Fair, good. Bailey. South four to six. Fair, good.
Farar. West or northwest two to four. Fair, good. Farar. Faros. Southwest three
to five. Fair, good. Southeast Iceland. Southwesterly five or six. Occasionally
seven at first in far north. Showers, good. Weather reports now from coastal
stations for 0400. Tyree Automatic. South by west three. Sixteen miles. 1031,
rising slowly. Stornoway. West northwest one. Nineteen miles. 1031, rising more
slowly. Lerwick. West by north two. 27 miles. 1030, rising slowly. Lucas. North
one. 24 miles. 1030, rising slowly. Bridlington. Northeast by north four. 1026,
rising slowly. Sandetti Light Vessel Automatic. Northeast by east five. 11
miles. 1020. Greenwich Light Vessel Automatic. Five miles. 1020. Jersey.
Northeast by east four. Channel Light Vessel Automatic. Northeast by east six.
1021. Silly Automatic. East northeast five. 13 miles. 1022, rising more slowly.
Valenci. Northeast by east two. 22 miles. 1024, now falling. Ronaldsway.
Northeast by north three. 1028, rising slowly. Malinhead. Southeast by south
three. 24 miles. 1030, rising slowly. And here is the weather forecast for the
inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, valid for the following 24
hours issued by the Met Office at 0500 on Sunday 26th February 2023. The general
situation. High pressure will remain centred close to northern Scotland
throughout, giving a strong northeasterly flow in the south. Cape Raft to Ratri
Head, including Orkney. Variable, one to three. Fair. Good. Ratri Head to
Berwick upon Tweed, north or northeast three or four. Occasionally five at
first. Showers at first. Good. Berwick upon Tweed to Whitby, north or northeast
three to five. Showers. Good. Whitby to Gibraltar Point, northeast four or five.
Showers. Good. Gibraltar Point to Northfallen, northeasterly four or five.
Occasionally six in south. Showers. Good. Northfallen to Celcie Bill,
northeasterly five or six. Occasionally seven in Strait of Dover. Showers,
mainly in Strait of Dover. Good. Celcie Bill to Lime Regis, northeast four or
five. Occasionally six offshore. Fair. Good. Lime Regis to Land's End, including
the Isles of Scilly. Northeast four or five. Occasionally six around exposed
headlands. Fair. Good. Land's End to St David's Head, including the Bristol
Channel. Eastily or northeasterly four or five. Occasionally six at first in
west. Fair. Good. St David's Head to Great Ormhead, including St George's
Channel. Northeast three or four. Occasionally five at first. Fair. Good. Great
Ormhead to the Mull of Galloway. Northeast three or four. Occasionally five at
first. Fair. Good. Isle of Man, northeast three or four. Fair. Good. Loch Fjöll
to Collingford Loch. East or southeast three or four. Occasionally five at
first. Fair. Good. Mull of Galloway to the Mull of Kintar, including the Firth
of Clyde and North Channel. East or northeast three or four. Fair. Good. Mull of
Kintar to Ardna Muchen Point. East or southeast two to four. Fair. Good. Ardna
Muchen Point to Cape Wrath. South or southeast two to four, becoming variable
one to three. Fair. Good. Shetland Isles, west or northwest two to four. Fair.
Good. And here's the general situation one more time. High pressure will remain
centred close to northern Scotland throughout, giving a strong northestly flow
in the south. And that completes the shipping forecast. I'll be back with a
general look at the weather in just a few minutes. Thanks Louise. This is BBC
Radio 4. It's half past five on Sunday, February the 26th. Good morning. This is
News Briefing with Lisa Costello. The Prime Minister says he's giving it
everything to solve the post Brexit trade arrangements for Northern Ireland. A
71-year-old man has been arrested by police investigating the attempted murder
of a senior officer in Omer. And in sport, the English and Scottish League Cup
finals take place this afternoon. Rishi Sunak says his government is giving it
everything to finalise a new deal with the EU on post-Brexit trading rules for
Northern Ireland. Mr Sunak told the Sunday Times he was hopeful of a positive
outcome and that he wanted to get the job done. He's been trying to win support
among some Tory MPs and the Democratic Unionist Party, who oppose the current
arrangement. The Conservative MP Tobias Elwood says it's unimportant the deal
gets over the line. What we need to think of is what's best in the interests of
the British economy, the Northern Irish economy and indeed that of Ireland, of
working together to draw a line and move this forward. There will be many people
across the UK and indeed beyond. They will be baffled to see the Tories head to
head like this. Police investigating the attempted murder of a senior officer in
County Tyrone have arrested a 71-year-old man under the Terrorism Act. Detective
Chief Inspector John Caldwell remains critically ill after he was shot at a
sports centre in Omer on Wednesday in front of his son. Police have said the
Dissident Republican Group, the new IRA, is their primary line of inquiry. Five
other men remain in custody. Alison Morris, who's a crime correspondent for the
Belfast Telegraph, thinks the authorities were caught off guard. A civil senior
officer had been targeted in Northern Ireland since the Good Friday Agreement
and actually quite a distance before that, probably in the last 30 years. In the
previous attacks we've seen uniform officers have had bombs placed under their
car or there's been gun attacks on uniform officers but for an attack like this
on someone of the seniority of John Caldwell, it's something that I don't think
is the policing coming. Managers at social housing organisations in England will
be required to have professional qualifications under government plans to
improve standards in the sector. The new rules are the latest response to the
Grenfell Tower disaster and the death of two-year-old Awab Ishak after exposure
to mould at his family's home in Rochdale in 2020. The former Labour MP Luciana
Berger is rejoining the party four years after she left because of concerns
about anti-Semitism. Ms Berger said Labour had turned a significant corner under
secure starma. The former Labour donor, Lord Sainsbury, has also returned to the
party with a donation reported to be worth £2 million. Rescue teams searching
for a hill walker who's been missing in the Highlands since last Sunday have
found the bodies of a man and a dog in the Glencoe area. Formal identification
is still to take place but the family of 33-year-old Kyle Sandbrook from West
Yorkshire have been informed. He'd been wild camping with his beagle, called
Bane. Sheffield will become the latest city to introduce a clean air zone to
tackle pollution. Similar schemes are already in place in cities including
Portsmouth and Birmingham. From tomorrow, drivers of the most polluting vehicles
will be charged to enter the area. Critics say they're concerned that poorer
people will be disproportionately hit with fines. A clean air zone was
introduced just before Christmas in Bristol but these cyclists say they haven't
noticed a difference. I think everyone in Bristol agrees that we all have a bad
cough that lingers and I think the air quality is terrible. Anything we can do
to improve it I fully support. I'm not really seeing a difference. My lungs
better, no they're the same as they were last year as well. As a cyclist it
hasn't made the roads any quieter. Judges at one of Europe's leading film
festivals, the Berlinale, have awarded the top prize to a French documentary. On
the Adamant is about a floating daycare centre for people with mental illness.
In another surprise, the award for best leading actor went to an eight-year-old,
Sophia Otero, who plays a transgender child in the film 20,000 Speeches of Bees.
That's the news, now Louise Lear is back with today's weather. Good morning all.
It's very quiet out there which is probably good news for a Sunday. We like a
nice gentle weather story don't we? Lot of sunshine in comparison to yesterday
and that is because we've got slightly lighter winds. Now the wind direction is
still coming from the north east so it's still going to be a chilly day but we
haven't got the wind chill that we had yesterday. There are a few isolated
showers and these are running still down through north sea coasts to the east of
the Pennines and a cluster of showers at the moment just clipping the Kent coast
and because temperatures are on the low side these might have a little bit of a
wintry flavour but generally speaking it's dry, settled with some sunny spells
coming through. The exception will be the north of England and parts of north
Wales. Here we may keep some cloud that just lingers all day and if that happens
then the temperatures are likely to struggle. So generally highs of 5 to 9
Celsius that's about average for the time of year. If you keep the cloud in the
far north and west we might only see temperatures at around 4 degrees but on the
whole not a bad Sunday in prospect. And there's more to come in terms of dry
weather but on Monday we might see a little more in the way of clouds so it'll
be a chilly start, not too much frost with the cloud rolling in but cloud cover
will continue to be an issue particularly the further east you are so the best
of the sunshine on Monday into the far north and west particularly in Scotland
and Northern Ireland and it looks likely on Monday that we'll see temperatures 5
to 9 Celsius where we've got the best of the sunshine maybe highs of 10. That's
it, enjoy your day. Thanks Louise. Time now for a look at the papers. And I'm
the PM who will get Brexit done is the Sunday Times headline. It reports that Mr
Sunak's prepared to take on Eurosceptics in his party and unveil a new deal with
the EU on post-Brexit trading rules for Northern Ireland with or without the
explicit endorsement of the Democratic Unionist Party. In what it describes as a
snub the Sunday Telegraph says Mr Sunak is poised to scrap Boris Johnson's
Northern Ireland Protocol Bill which was designed to give the government power
to rip up parts of the protocol. Writing for the paper Mr Sunak says the bill
was always a last resort. The Telegraph says he believes the legislation is no
longer necessary as a bargaining chip. The paper adds that he's facing a revolt
and the Northern Ireland minister and prominent Brexiteer Steve Baker is on
resignation watch after being frozen out of negotiations. Mr Baker has declined
to comment. Mr Sunak has also written an article for The Sun where he argues
that the protocol doesn't work, needs fixing and he is determined to deliver.
The online-only Independent says senior Brexiteers are split over whether to
oppose any deal. It says members of the European research group of Eurosceptic
Tories have said they're prepared to force a showdown vote in Parliament. The
Mail on Sunday says Rishi Sunak has been accused by some senior conservatives of
entangling the king in what it calls toxic Brexit politics by sending him on a
tour to, as the paper puts it, schmooze EU nations. It says the king's
forthcoming visit to Berlin and Paris is being seen as a charm offensive as the
Prime Minister holds talks with Brussels. Its editorial warns negotiate with the
EU in haste Rishi and repent at your leisure. The Observer leads on a report
that one in 100 police officers in England and Wales faced criminal charges last
year. An investigation by the paper found the police federation received more
than 1,300 claims for legal support from members facing criminal charges in
2022. It says the federation refused to comment. The Sunday Express reports on a
government crackdown on lawyers representing asylum seekers. Using the phrase
activist lawyers, it says several firms are being monitored for creating work
for themselves. The president of the Law Society is quoted responding that law
firms are rigorously regulated and held to high standards. The Sunday Telegraph
reports that Ian Fleming's James Bond novels have been rewritten to remove a
number of references to race. It says the books, which are being reissued this
spring, have been subjected to a review by sensitivity readers. For instance, in
the reworked version of Live and Let Die, Bond's assessment that would be
African criminals in the Golden Diamond trades are pretty lure-abiding chaps, I
should have thought, except when they've drunk too much. The reference to
alcohol is dropped, and in a scene where Bond finds himself watching a strip
tease at a Harlem nightclub, the audience panting and grunting like pigs at the
trough is watered down to Bond could sense the electric tension in the room.
That's the papers. Now sport and in football. The first silverware of the
English and Scottish seasons will be decided today with news of that and the
rest of the headlines. Here's Paul Saris. Yes, Newcastle United take on
Manchester United in the final of the League Cup at Wembley Stadium this
afternoon. We can hear from both managers now, Newcastle's Eddie Howe in a
moment. But first, Eric Tenharg of Manchester United. It's massive, but first
get the first one. So now we have the opportunity to get that one and don't
think further ahead. That doesn't make sense. It doesn't help you. We have the
opportunity Sunday. We have to put everything we have in to get the trophy and
to get him into Manchester. Yeah, it would mean everything to me. Of course it
would. It would mean everything to me to make the Newcastle supporters happy,
proud. And I'd love nothing more than to see them celebrating on Sunday night.
Celtic face Rangers in an old firm Derby in the Scottish League Cup final at
Hampton Park. Here's the Celtic manager, Ange Postekoglou. Yeah, looking forward
to it. It's a Cup final and a trophy on the line. It's one of three on offer
domestically. So you want to try and, particularly if you've got to a final, try
and make sure we're ready for the day and perform well and hopefully get the job
done. In Rugby Union, the England head coach, Steve Borthwick, says his side
have to use yesterday's 20 points to 10 win over Wales in Cardiff as a platform
for the rest of their Six Nations campaign. I think now we've got to push on.
You know, I think there's there's bits in that performance that we can really
push on with now as this this rebuild. We need to accelerate. We've got two big
games to finish the championship. But for now, we're going to make sure we enjoy
that wing. Elsewhere, Ireland kept their hopes of the Grand Slam alive with a 34
20 win over Italy in Rome. France hosts Scotland in today's match in the Six
Nations. Sean Murphy will face Ali Carter in the final of Snookers Players
Championship this afternoon after a six frames to three win over Kyronn Wilson
in the last four. And in cricket, day three of the second test match between
England and New Zealand has just finished at the Basin Reserve in Wellington.
The hosts reached jumps on two hundred and two for three, still twenty four runs
behind England's first innings total. Thanks, Paul. Finally, I glance back at
some of the stories that were making news on this state in earlier years. This
time last year, on the third day of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, officials
in Kiev said they'd fought back the latest assault on the capital. President
Zelensky insisted his forces were still in control of Ukraine's major cities and
Moscow's plan to oust him from power had been derailed. In 2014, two men who
murdered Fusilier Lee Rigby outside Woolwich Barracks in southeast London were
sentenced. Michael Adebolajo was given a whole life tariff while his accomplice,
Michael Adebowale, was jailed for a minimum of forty five years. On this day in
1987, the Church of England's General Synod voted by a huge majority to pave the
way for the ordination of women priests. The church had been debating the issue
for ten years. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Runcey, backed the idea and
dismissed opponents who were threatening a breakaway church. A parallel body
claiming to represent the true Church of England is really a non-starter, and
the continuing churches in South Africa and the USA are not happy examples. In
1995, Britain's oldest merchant bank, Bearings, collapsed after a rogue trader,
Nick Leeson, ran up losses of nearly a billion pounds. Leeson spent four years
in prison. In 2000, the UK government brought a civil suit against the former
spy David Shaler for breach of confidence after he leaked Secret Service files
to a national newspaper. Thirty years ago, a lorry bomb exploded in a car park
underneath the World Trade Center in New York. Six people were killed and more
than a thousand others were injured in what was the deadliest terror attack on
US soil at the time. And on this day in 1839, the first Grand National was run
at Aintree, then called the Grand Liverpool Steeplechase. It was won by a horse
called Lottery. And that completes our news briefing for today. You're listening
to BBC Radio 4, where now it's time for Bells on Sunday, which this week comes
from the Cathedral Church of St Mary, the Virgin with St Paul in Blackburn
Lancashire. Raised to a cathedral when the Diocese of Blackburn was created in
1926, there has been a church on this site since Saxon times. By 1818, the
parish church buildings were in such disrepair that a new parish church was
built and an old ring of six bells transferred from the old to the new parish
church. Today, there are ten bells cast in 1949 by John Taylor of Loughborough,
with a tenner weighing 25 and a quarter hundred weight tuned to D. We now hear
the heaviest eight bells ringing Bristol Surprise Nature. We now hear the
heaviest eight bells ringing Bristol Surprise Nature. Those were the bells of
the Cathedral Church of St Mary. St Mary the Virgin with St Paul in Blackburn
Lancashire. And now on Radio 4, Mark Cole's Profiles the Composer, Shirley J.
Thompson. Music fit for a king this week. Some big names ring promise for
Charles III's coronation weekend in May, the Spice Girls and Lionel Richie. Both
rumoured to be on the bill for a celebratory concert in the grounds of Windsor
Castle. Cats Composer Andrew Lloyd Webber. That's what I call music. He's
written a special coronation anthem for the ceremony in Westminster Abbey and
there'll also be new works from some of Britain's leading classical composers,
including the woman we're profiling this week, Shirley J. Thompson. She is quite
unique. She's a trailblazer. You can't put her in a box and say she's that kind
of composer and she writes that kind of music. Shirley has bridged the gap
between the European classical genre and her African black Jamaican heritage.
Thompson, one of the contemporary classical world's leading lights, more of an
indie jazz world and wonky beats man myself. So time to bring on an expert, I
reckon. My name is Susannah Eastburn and I'm currently chief executive of Sound
and Music, which is the UK's national organisation for new music. Perfect. Her
music is incredibly beautiful, very communicative. She's worked in film, she's
worked in dance, she works with orchestra, she works in education. So there's a
lovely mix of things going on. The other thing is also about the story she tells
through her music. Shirley Thompson was born in January 1958 in East Ham in
London's East End, the eldest of five children. We lived in a modest to up to
town just off of the main high street. Dad worked as a forklift driver at Virgil
Paint Factory in Stratford and mum was a district nurse. Parents Samuel and
Hyacinth were in their early twenties when they moved to Britain from Jamaica,
part of the late 1950s windrush generation. Shirley's younger brother Richard
takes up the story. Dad came over first, his ship came into Dover and mum came
over a couple of years later and came to do their bit to help rebuild a war-torn
UK. A father into his music. My dad had a radio ground, a stand-alone turntable
with a cup of speakers, a unit on the right and on the left was a small drinks
cabinet and it was all encased in one. You'd have your small shot glasses on the
left, so that was my dad's pride and joy. There was always something being
played, whether it be Ruck Steady or Blue Beat or Country Western Albums, from
an early age there was always music allowed. We knew the power of music.
Shirley's own musical awakening started aged three when she came across an old
piano in the attic of a house next door. By four she was playing the recorder,
like we all, followed by the violin, which she would doggedly practise in the
bedroom above the family lounge as they struggled to watch TV. Well, there were
times where we felt as though we needed a break. Her parents encouraged her to
join a local choir, the local youth orchestra too, which she went on to lead.
She did well at school, got good grades, until her last year at Primary when
Thompson told a recent TEDx Jamaica event she felt teachers inexplicably started
marking her down. And that for me was a watershed moment when all my friends
went to the grammar school and I, a girl of colour by coincidence, was sent off
to the worst school in the borough. The family suspected discrimination. Her
mother demanded to see the education chief, took Shirley's school reports with
her and eventually got the decision overturned. Our mum, a really forthright
woman, she would have gone to the ends of the earth for any of her children.
During school summer holidays Shirley would be put in charge of her siblings
tasked with keeping them entertained. Shirley was instrumental in planning all
of our games. As the youngest, Richard would often find himself rolled up in a
blanket, his sister and the others lifting him up and swinging him round and
round in circles at speed. I couldn't see anything at all. Sounds terrifying.
Will you not shout his Shirley? Stop it! I think I was too terrified to vocalise
anything. Shirley herself excelled at more conventional sports, netball, long
jump and sprinting. But her mum, not to be messed with, said no to focusing on
sport, thought studying was a far better option. So in 1976 Shirley applied to
study music, along with history, at Liverpool University. Professor Robert
Allitch remembers interviewing her back then. She showed us a piece that she'd
written for a trio, for a flute, piano and violin. It wasn't like anything that
students do all need to know. I think we offered to replace it with any A levels
actually. It was while at Liverpool she first met close friend Joan St John, the
pair of them regularly out clubbing and going to gigs. Earth Wind and Fire, I
think was a particular favourite of hers, but Shirley loves any music. It could
be soul, it could be reggae, it could be various different types of music. Music
eventually got the upper hand over history. Thompson an enthusiastic student,
but determined to find her own musical direction. After Liverpool she went to do
a Masters in Composition at London's Goldsmiths College, juggling it with
working for a music publishing company, using the money she earned to visit
Jamaica for the first time. Thompson eager to learn about her heritage, recalls
distant cousin Steadman Fuller, now Governor General of the Jamaican capital,
Kingston. I call her a cultural historian because she comes back and she wants
to capture detail of the land age of the family and also meeting up with younger
generations of the family. Keen on her Jamaican food too. Yes, whenever she
comes to Jamaica we make sure that she goes out to get a serving of real
authentic Jamaican meal, a special prepared oxtail in Jamaican style or whether
it's one of four dishes of Caribbean fish. Back in the land of pie and mash,
Thompson's first major commission was for London's Greenwich International
Festival, a chamber orchestral work about Caribbean nations and their vision for
self-determination. In the late 80s and early 90s she turned to writing for film
and television. Her music for TV drama series, South of the Border, selected as
one of the BBC's top 20 themes back then. By the mid 90s she'd formed the
Shirley Thompson Ensemble, an unusual mix of instrumental soloists, singers,
dancers, visual artists and poets. She brings who she is into her music, her
East London Jamaican origin, her faith, all of those things are important and I
think they feed into her work. She was hired for her first Royal Engagements,
performing for the Queen at Westminster Abbey in 1999, then commissioned to
compose a large scale work to commemorate the Golden Jubilee in 2002. Money no
object she was told. It led to New Nation Rising, a 21st century symphony, her
first full orchestral work, a huge piece celebrating a thousand year history of
London, taking in watershed moments in English history, going from rural idyll
to industrial revolution through two world wars and onto the present day.
Thompson introducing drums, electric guitars, soul singers, even hip-hop to the
orchestral mix. Some of those themes also appeared in the London Olympic Games
opening ceremony a decade later, something Shirley Thompson was upset about
because she felt she should have been included. Susanna Reesbourne. She was the
first woman to compose and conduct a symphony in the last 40 years in the UK.
Thompson's younger brother Richard, my now a photographer, was involved too,
taking shots of the recording session for the cover of what would become his
sister's debut album release. It was then and only then I realised that that was
my sister conducting the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra and kind of taking it in
the stride. I experienced goosebumps. I had to take a minute and I realised that
this was a special person. For me, it was a really proud moment. Her works have
now been performed all over the world, PUSH, the award-winning ballet she co-
scored in 2005, toured for 15 years, staged in more than 40 different countries.
She's written works about Barack Obama, Nelson Mandela, as well as the abolition
of the slave trade. In the sort of narrower, more traditional world of classical
music, I do think her music isn't as recognised as perhaps it should be. There
are still some people who work in classical music who have quite a limited view
of what a composer should look and sound like. So it's race and gender. In 2018,
to mark the 70th anniversary of the docking of the Empire Windrush, Thompson was
commissioned to compose a new anthem which was performed at a special service in
Westminster Abbey. She's really wanted to celebrate her parents' experience and
I think she did that wonderfully well. These kind of stories are not the ones we
normally hear in a classical music concert. The following year, she was awarded
an OBE for her services to music, though establishment recognition wasn't going
to mellow her music's message. 2021's Song of the Prophets was about the global
impact of climate change, breathe, inspired by the Black Lives Matter movement.
A lot of the projects that she's done, she's effectively made them happen on her
own, so she's not only composed them, but she's produced them, she's put the
films together. That means it's a staggering amount of work to do all of that.
What little downtime she gets, she likes to watch Mr Bean and Mr Fed. Absolutely
loves tennis and is a big Roger Federer fan. We've queued up outside Wimbledon
many years ago and one year we queued, I think, for seven hours, managed to get
in seeing ours tennis and then that was the end of play. She's pretty au fait
with Football 2, by the sound of things, commissioned by UEFA last year to write
two pieces for the Women's Euros, including the world's first concerto for
footballers and orchestra, which featured a score recorded by the Royal
Philharmonic Orchestra as well as a choreographed routine of ball skills. I'm
rather Richard impressed. I thought the Euros last year, you know, I thought
that was a big deal. Only to be trumped now by King Charles' latest invite.
Shirley J. Thompson, one of 12 composers he's personally hand-picked to compose
music for his coronation on May the 6th. So what does Susannah Eastburne think
we'll get? I would be surprised if she did something kind of really serious and
formal. I imagine it'll be very celebratory. She's done things for the Royal
Family before, so I think they'll be kind of warmth in it as well. I'm beyond
excited, she tweeted this week, Shirley Thompson, an astute choice by the new
King, thinks her close friend, Joan St John. She encompasses so many different
aspects of life in the UK in the 21st century and she stands out there by
herself and I think she will be one of the ideal people to contribute to this.
Profile was presented by Mark Coles and the producer was Sally Abrahams. We hear
about the complexities in giving and receiving gifts on Something Understood.
It's coming up in five minutes. Discover the very best in arts and culture with
Front Row. I love when the theatre becomes absolutely silent and they're like,
what's happening? With live discussions, news and reviews. It was extraordinary,
I got very moved. And interviews with the people creating and changing the world
of arts around us. I pay a lot of attention to lessons in the human condition
that never cease to inspire me. Join Tom Sutcliffe and me, Samira Ahmed, for
Front Row. Some of the lines that I write I personally do actually really love.
I have every Monday to Thursday evening on radio.