TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is BBC Radio 4. It's five o'clock, time for PM with Evan Davis. Hello
there. The UN General Assembly in New York debating Ukraine right now. A motion
for Russia to get out. Let's dip in live to the proceedings.... facilitating
safe and unfettered access to humanitarian aid for those in need. Well, that is
Iran's speaker taking the stage in that debate. Here's a taste of some of the
contributions that we've recorded. This invasion was unprovoked. If Ukraine
stops fighting, there will be no more Ukraine. We are witnessing a flagrant
violation of international law. Well, on PM, we'll hear how different countries
see the war, countries that are not always aligned to the Western view of it.
Also on the programme, the shooting of a senior police officer in Omar last
night in front of his son and more than a dozen other children. The headteacher
of Omar High School tells us of the shock they've experienced. Some of them are
in such a shock that they cannot express themselves in the moment. I had kids
today crying. They didn't want to do anything other than just stay in the next
to my room and cry there. The Labour Party has set out five national missions.
Not much detail on how to deliver them as yet. We'll interrogate the Shadow
Health Secretary. We're streeting. Gary Lineker joins us as we remember
commentator John Motsen, who's died at the age of 77. And... To shine shine,
hush hush, I do I. To shine shine, hush hush, I do I. Ever feel too shy to speak
to strangers at parties? Well, the broadcaster Adrian Childs is the same. We get
some tips for him from an expert on the art of conversation. But we'll start
with the BBC News, read today by Tina Ritchie. Police in Northern Ireland have
arrested three people on suspicion of attempted murder after an off-duty officer
was shot in County Tyrone. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell was attacked
outside a sports complex in Omar. He is in a critical condition in hospital. In
a joint statement, all five main parties at Stormont said they were outraged and
sickened by the shooting. Our Ireland correspondent Chris Page reports from the
scene. John Caldwell was putting footballs into his car with his son when he was
attacked by two gunmen. He ran from them and when he fell on the ground, the men
continued firing at him. Eyewitnesses have said the sports complex was busy with
children at the time. The investigation's at an early stage, but police have
said they're focusing their inquiries on the group known as the New IRA. It's
thought to be the largest and most active of the dissident Republican
organisations who are opposed to the peace process. Three men have been arrested
in County Tyrone. They're aged 38, 45 and 47 and are being questioned in
Belfast. The United Nations General Assembly is holding an emergency session in
New York ahead of a vote on a special resolution that calls for Russia to
withdraw all its forces from Ukrainian territory and end hostilities. The ballot
has no legal standing, but is considered an important measure of international
opinion. Our UN correspondent Neda Taufik reports. The session has been
dominated so far by speeches from Ukraine's supporters, urging members to
reaffirm their commitment to the founding principles of the UN by supporting the
resolution. The first speaker of the day, representing the Nordic countries, was
Denmark's Foreign Minister Lars Loke Rasmussen. He brandished the UN Charter,
telling members that it clearly prohibited aggression and wars of conquest.
Later this afternoon, China, Russia's most powerful ally, will address the
Assembly. Beijing in the past has abstained on similar votes and says it will
soon release a policy paper, setting out its position on how to settle the
conflict through political means. The Labour leader, Sakhir Starmer, has
promised an end to what he called sticking-plaster policies if his party wins
the next election. During a speech in Manchester, Sakhir set out his five
missions for government, which include making Britain a clean energy superpower,
fixing the NHS, and securing the highest sustained economic growth in the G7
group of developed nations. Official figures show that one in four ambulance
patients in England waited at least 30 minutes to be transferred to A&E last
week. That's the longest waiting time since early January. NHS England says
there are 5,000 more patients in hospital than this time last year, due to a
rise in Covid cases. Labour says the asylum system has been broken by the
government, after official figures showed a record 166,000 asylum seekers were
still awaiting an initial decision on their case. The Home Office says it's
recruited hundreds of workers to help reduce the backlog. Our home editor Mark
Easton has more details. Rishi Sunak has vowed to stop the migrant boats
crossing the Channel by swiftly returning asylum seekers arriving by irregular
routes, but his hopes of speeding up the asylum system by eradicating the
backlog of cases have been dealt a blow by new figures, showing the numbers
awaiting even an initial decision from the Home Office has risen by 60% in a
year, topping 160,000 for the first time. Ideas to clear the backlog include
granting asylum to migrants from five countries with high acceptance rates,
without the need to attend a face-to-face interview. Instead, they must complete
a 10-page form in English. The former BBC football commentator John Motsen has
died at the age of 77. During his 50-year career, he covered more than 2,000
matches, including 10 World Cups and 29 FA Cup finals. The Prince of Wales,
who's the president of the FA, said Motsen was the voice of football. Thank you
very much, Tina. Now, they're going to vote later in the UN General Assembly.
It's a long motion they're debating. Paragraph 5 demands that Russia
immediately, completely and unconditionally withdraw all of its military forces
from the territory of Ukraine within its internationally recognised borders, and
calls also for a cessation of hostilities. Well, it's a clear enough position
one year on to this war, but how many countries will support it? It is one
country, one vote. The Germans said this morning it's important to get 100 votes
in favour of that motion. That's a bit over half the UN members. The debate
picked up this afternoon. It has some way to go. They might even, in fact, be
voting on it tomorrow. But let's just listen to a couple of contributions.
Denmark's foreign minister, Lars Rasmussen, spoke on behalf of all the Nordic
countries on the importance of supporting Ukraine. As the late Archbishop
Desmond Tutu said, if you are neutral in situations of injustice, you have
chosen the side of the oppressor. The fact remains today as simple as one year
ago. If Russia stops fighting, there will be no more war. If Ukraine stops
fighting, there will be no more Ukraine. Well, France's foreign minister,
Catherine Colonna, denounced Russia's aggression and its tactics. Russia shows
no desire for peace. Conversely, Russia shows no desire for peace and respects
no boundaries. The only dialogue it will accept is that which subjugates the
other side, in Ukraine as elsewhere. The only peace it accepts is the silence of
the dead and of ruins. And then let's just hear a little bit of Japan's foreign
minister, Hayashi Yoshimasa, who insisted any peace process must abide by the UN
Charter. What if a permanent member of the Security Council wrote an aggression
against your homeland, gloved your territory and then ceased hostilities,
calling for peace? I would call it an unjust peace. So those are some of the
contributions in common there, condemnation really of what Russia's done. But
while most of the developed Western nations consider the Russian operation, an
invasion, bombing of infrastructure and the committing of war crimes to be
obviously something to condemn, it's not nearly as clear cut in much of the rest
of the world. So we thought we might spend a little time hearing how this war, a
year on, is viewed in some other parts of the world. And we're going to start in
India with Anjali Istwal, who's senior editor at India Today. There is no one
side that India has taken. India has made it amply clear that it's not choosing
a side. India is very clearly saying that we want you to talk. As Prime Minister
Modi had said, this is not an era for war. And that, in fact, has become a
defining statement coming from any world leader. And in fact, if you would see
everybody, every other nation and world leaders have mentioned and referred to
that statement. So India is very clear about the fact that we are not choosing a
side in this war. They are aware of the humanitarian crisis and they are
consistently emphasising on the fact that we need to stop the war and is urging
from its side, both the sides to come on a negotiating table. I guess I'm
puzzled because with issues around Pakistan on the border and China too
sometimes, surely India would say territorial integrity is all. You can't have
one country walking into another one. Absolutely. And that is something India
has stated again and again. India has opened dialogue channels with Ukraine and
Russia. And when Prime Minister Modi said that this is not an era of war, it is
sort of pointing towards the fact that a UN charter is supreme. But we have to
understand that it's a very ambiguous situation. It's not like everybody is
black or white. And India right now is very clear about it, that we are not
going to walk on the toad line of the Western countries. So, you know, here we
are trying to make our own narrative, our own story. And very clearly, no, we
are not going to say the same thing that the West is saying or what the NATO
wants us to say, or for that matter, US wants us to say, even though India likes
US as a partner. But territorial integrity is something that we understand. But
India has clearly stated that this is something territorial integrity also, this
entire issue can be sorted out. Once you come down to a negotiation, diplomacy,
dialogue, these are the most important fundamentals for peace negotiation. The
View from India, Anjali Istwal there from India Today, making the point India
doesn't want to follow instructions of the West. Let's go to Israel. We can hear
from Tova Lazarov, who's deputy editor of the Jerusalem Post. Well, Israel is
part of the Western group of allies that is against Russia, and it sees itself
that way. Overall, it has not hesitated to condemn the war, to condemn Russia.
It has voted with Ukraine every time at the United Nations. It's been very clear
on a policy level. It's also been very good at humanitarian assistance. But it
runs into trouble as the bar moves up. Right. Because I hear this but coming.
Yeah, I had to set it up. What was good, you know, maybe in the beginning,
right, when everyone's going, oh, my God, you know, this is terrible. And how do
we help Ukraine? You know, now you've got offensive weapons rolling into
Ukraine. You know, Israel isn't on the list, even though it has a Markov tank
that, you know, could be good. And it hasn't even given it defensive weapons.
But the issue here is that, first of all, Israel's always had a good
relationship with Russia. And that's been a useful thing for Israel,
particularly because the Russian military is active in Syria and Syria borders
Israel. So we have Russia literally on our border, in some ways not so different
from Poland, except that Poland is a NATO country and Israel is not. So the idea
that the Russian military is already there on our border, you know, that's the
first thing that gives one pause. And Russia has been very clear with Israel
that defensive weapons would be a red line. Tova Lazarov on Israel's thinking
about the war. And finally, let's go to South Africa. We heard a reference to
Desmond Tutu, a quote from Desmond Tutu earlier. I spoke to Crystal Audison, a
journalist based in Cape Town. In South Africa, there's mixed reviews. If you
talk to politicians, those that are in the opposition benches, they will tell
you that South Africa's foreign policy is being dictated by the African National
Congress, which is, of course, in government. If you speak to ANC members or
officials, they will tell you that they don't want to be dragged into a war
that's far away geographically. They find that the West often sends out
contradictory messages around who they support and who they're not supporting.
And that South Africa is an independent country and they won't be bullied by
others who want them to take a particular view. If you, for instance, speak to
EFF supporters, which is your kind of young black, either unemployed or young
radical people at university, they will say, you know. In fact, perhaps South
Africa should strengthen the economic alliance with Russia because, again, they
feel that South Africa should not be strong-armed by the West that want to
dictate how a country gives a particular opinion around what's happening. But if
you, of course, speak to middle-class South Africans, and of course, at East
South Africa, race will always come into the play, white South Africans, you
know, there is an opinion and a sense that the ANC is using its historical ties.
And, yeah, I mean, during exile, the African National Congress, they were
supported financially, politically by Russia. A lot of ANC members that's
currently in government actually either studied in Russia, they can speak
Russian, they spent their exile years in Russia. And they often think that that
historical relation often dictates what's happening now and how South Africa has
officially taken a neutral stance. But for some within the middle class, it's
this historical relation that's blurring the lines. Crystal Auderson there for
the perspective from South Africa. You see a pattern in all of those countries
wanting to make up their own mind on it, not wanting to be dragooned into lining
up with the West. It might be one of those moments where the West discovers it's
not as popular as it might have hoped. Let's just talk briefly to Bronwyn
Maddox, Chief Executive of the Foreign Affairs Think Tank, Chatham House,
amongst other things, has been Foreign Editor of the Times. And Bronwyn, I don't
know, in some ways it feels as though a lot of the ambivalence about what is
going on in Ukraine is more a reaction against the West than it is support for
Russia. It's a desire not to be seen, to be pushed around by a West that is
often regarded as hypocritical in those parts. It's a really interesting point.
I don't think it's support for Russia in most cases, other than the countries
that really have had ties and trading ties with Russia. And there are some, as
we've just heard, but I think some of it is don't push us around. Some of it is
this is nothing to do with us. This is your war. Don't ask us to take sides
which might compromise our own interests. And what I heard very loudly at the
Munich Security Conference, which was dominated by Ukraine last weekend, was
countries, many of them poorer countries, saying, look, why don't you care about
our conflict? Why don't you care anything like as much as this when war erupts
in our countries and you don't care about our refugees as much? Why don't you do
something about that? And there was really a real passion behind that as well. I
wonder if it matters whether the whole world isn't on the same side on this.
Does it have a material effect on the outcome of the war, the support for
Ukraine that's coming from the West? Does it make much difference? It's a good
question. I think it actually does make some difference to the outcome of the
war in terms of which countries are providing support. It also, you know, the
war affects more countries than are perhaps acknowledging it at the moment
through inflation. You see that a lot of the Middle East through food and energy
price inflation. But I think it matters for the West in whether the West can win
this argument. And it's an argument of words, not of munitions about these being
global values, observing the rule of law. That there is such a thing as
international law that the countries will be held to that offences like marching
into another country and killing thousands of civilians, that these things are
ones that the world should care about. And I think the West has been really
disconcerted in this and in realising that it's going to have to make an
argument that it thought was self-evident. It's interesting, isn't it? Because
when this war is over, the West must look at itself and say, we've got a bit of
a job to do here to kind of rebuild relations with a lot of the world who
obviously don't think like we do and don't like the way we react to that. We in
the West react to things that they think it is hypocritical. It is inconsistent.
I think it has to confront that question of double standards, though many of the
countries making that charge of double standards are themselves guilty of it in
other ways. It's an argument that has many, many sides. But I think the point,
in the sense in which this is a bit of a turning point, is it seems to me the
US, the UK, much of Europe, thought it was that the world would be obviously,
absolutely horrified and repelled and automatically share their view on it. And
they need to come out of this and realise that that is an argument that they can
make to the world. One that they have a lot of force in making, I think a lot of
justification in making, but they're actually going to have to win that one
anew. Something that I think they thought was one for eternity, if you like.
Yeah. Bronwyn, thanks for that. Bronwyn Maddox, Chief Executive of the Chatham
House Foreign Affairs Think Tank. Interestingly, we heard just a snippet, a tiny
snippet of Iran speaking at the UN General Assembly. In fact, Iran has said they
will be abstaining on the resolution. They don't agree with the wording as it
doesn't reflect both sides. So Iran taking that neutral position. Now, 19
minutes past five. Let's have a look at some other headlines. Here's Tina. A
group of transgender people has been given permission to appeal a judgment that
ruled NHS waiting times for trans healthcare were unlawful, were lawful. They
argue NHS England is breaking the law by not providing treatment within 18
weeks. Prosecutors in New York have charged Sam Bankman-Freed, who ran the
cryptocurrency exchange FTX, with four new offences, including fraud. He's
denied eight other charges. And four people have been arrested after protesters
painted the road outside the Russian embassy in London the colours of the
Ukrainian flag. They said they wanted to remind Moscow of Kiev's right to self-
determination. Thank you, Tina. Now, it seemed like something from a different
age in Northern Ireland last night. An off-duty policeman in Omar shot by two
gunmen while he was leading a football coaching session for his son and other
children. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is currently in a critical but
stable condition in hospital and three men have been arrested in connection with
the attack. Many of the children at the scene were from Omar High School. They
were aged between 11 and 14. And the principal of the school is Costas
Gaitatsis. Now, in the last hour, he told me how the children have been reacting
to what happened. Evan, it was shocking. The children that I've spoken this
morning have expressed the shock, some of them their fear. There is a number of
kids that are numb and silent. Some of them are really worried about their
football coach, obviously, that they don't know if he's going to make it
through. Clearly, the community is in shock, considering that actually the
person that was shot is a past pupil of ours as well. At the scene, it seems
that the children basically screamed and ran, really, as this was all breaking.
Yeah. You see, some of the kids, they were saying that they felt that it was
actually fireworks or firecrackers for some reason. Some kids directly saw the
two men in balaclavas with the guns shooting. And they saw the smoke and the
fire from the gun and they heard the sounds and they ran away in fear that
they're also shooting at them. Some of the kids ran so fast, they jumped over
hedges to try and avoid it. You see, at that moment, the actual session had
finished and they were all walking towards the car park outside the sports
complex. And this is when it actually happened. So you do imagine it was a big
group of kids, not just from our school, from all schools in the town, that were
walking outside the sports complex. And clearly, the fear that someone is
shooting at them led them into a panic, which then unfolded into the tragic
shooting, obviously, of John Caldwell. Obviously, these children have thankfully
been much less exposed to troubles and violence in Northern Ireland than earlier
cohorts. That is correct. And you see, the generation of 20 or 30 years ago
would have possibly dealt with this completely different manner. They might have
seen it as a fact of life in Northern Ireland, something that the children
nowadays is not something that they experience, not a normal, it's not a
normality. They will consider a space like the sports complex, their enormous
safe haven, like our schools, their safe places for them. And clearly coming
across a shocking event, a heinous attack of that nature, they never, I think,
some of them, as they were saying to me today, imagined that this will ever
happen to them. Some of them are actually worried. Is it going to happen again?
Is that how we're supposed to be from now on? Scared? And this is where we are
today. You've got a difficult task now as the principal of Omar High School of
dealing with the aftermath of this and with those children who will have been
badly, badly scarred by this. Are you planning to offer support? What is the way
you deal with this? The first step, Evan, this morning was we had an assembly.
We just had to give factual account of what happened the previous night, had to
explain that they are in a safe space here in school. And once we reassured the
whole community, we had to give them also the opportunity to come and talk to
us, especially the kids that were directly involved there last night. We also
rang to home to the kids that did not come to school. We reassured them that we
have opened these channels of communication. They can approach any of the senior
members of staff, the counselling service that is available. The shock will
manifest itself in different times, in a different way as we're going through
the days. Some of them are in such a shock that they cannot express themselves
in the moment. I had kids today crying. They didn't want to do anything other
than just stay in the next to my room and cry there. Some of them were going
over and over again what happened to them. So we will need to each individual to
be treated differently in terms of how they manifest that shock that they
experienced last night. That was Costas Gaitatsis, who's the principal of Omar
High School. Now an island in North Wales has been officially recognised for
having one of the best night skies in the world. Innes Enschede, also known as
Bardsey Island, has become the first site in Europe to be awarded International
Dark Sky Sanctuary certification. There are other dark sky certifications, but
this is the International Dark Sky Sanctuary, the first site in Europe to be
awarded it. Its location means it's one of the most remote and dark places on
earth. Here is an idea of what that darkness sounded like on the island last
night. I'm Marie and I live and work as a warden here on Innes Enschede. Enlli
is an island that lies two miles off the tip of Llŷn in North Wales. As I'm
recording this, it's half past eight in the evening and it's been three hours
since the sun set. I'm outside, I've switched my head torch off and the only
artificial light I can see is the occasional red flash of the lighthouse and
that's a mile south from where I am. To the west is beautiful. I can see a
slither of a new moon, Gewin a Llyod as we'd say in Welsh, and Jupiter and Venus
are shining on its right. The three of them will soon set on the west coast and
I'll be surrounded by darkness, but not a pitch black kind of darkness because
above me is shining with stars. It's early spring now and life is slowly
returning to the island. Everything is waking up and the night is about to come
alive again. Tonight I can hear the distant cries of the odd oyster catcher, but
in less than a month's time a colony of over 20,000 pairs of Manx shearwater
will return to the island. A nocturnal seabird that's completely dependent on a
dark sky as they only venture back to their burrows in the depths of the darkest
night. A truly dark sky has become something rare in the western world. Over 99%
of people resident in Europe live in the light polluted skies and this
inevitably has devastating effects on the natural world as well as us humans.
It's crazy to think how much has changed in the last hundred years. What I'm
experiencing right now, this pure form of darkness, would have been the most
normal thing in the world, but unfortunately that just isn't the case anymore.
So it's a privilege to live here, but more so to be working towards protecting
something truly important for nature, but also for future generations. Mary
Hughes there, the warden of the island of Innes and Schley, also known as
Bardsey, which has International Dark Sky Sanctuary certification. Now it's 27
minutes past five, a voice so familiar. We're appealing for offside, the Germans
in there in trouble, Alcantara couldn't do it, Linniker probably could, and
England have equalised! It's Gary Linniker! The ace marksman keeps England in
the World Cup with just ten minutes to go. It's his 35th goal for England and
who's to say it's not his most important? Particular rhythm, that excited tone,
pacey, informed, John Motsen, a voice so associated with television football,
has died. He was 77. You heard him there, commentating in his particular style,
I was going to say inimitable style, but in fact it was imitated. He was
describing then England international footballer Gary Linniker's goal against
West Germany in the 1990 World Cup semi-final. Gary Linniker joins us now, and
Gary, obviously a subject of John Motsen's commentary, also a colleague at the
BBC of him. Yes, indeed. Very sad day for all of us involved, not just at BBC
Sport, but in football in general. He was the voice of our sport for, well,
pretty much 50 years, wasn't he? And remarkable character, remarkable
commentator, and he always seemed to get the mood right and get the occasion and
just lived and breathed football, did John? Yes, he did make it look very easy,
and I know a lot of people think it must be very easy, footy fans thinking they
could do it, but actually it's not easy at all, is it? Commentating, I think
it's an incredible skill, and I've been involved in television for a long time,
but would never want to take that microphone and do an actual commentary on a
game. But I think the one thing you'd always say about John Motsen was that he
was incredibly well prepared, and he did masses of homework before games. I've
spent a lot of time with him over the years, watching him do his preparation. He
had a particular style of his little cardboard sheets that he put all the
information on every player, and he'd think about things he said, and he just
always pitched it right, I felt. He got the big goals right, he was almost an
anorak if you like, and I think you've got to be that a little bit to be a
commentator, certainly of his ilk. So it really is a full-time job, because you
can't just rock up and commentate on him, you were doing a lot of work in the
game. I mean, I think a lot of people would have a go if you're doing two well-
known Premier League sides, because you'd know most of the players, but you can
probably get found out when you end up in some World Cup group stage game
somewhere, or some obscure game. And then you have to, but no, you've got to do
your homework. I think more than anything with football commentary, you've got
to find a way of recognising players from a glimpse that perhaps you haven't
seen play very often. Whether it be the number on their shirts, their hairstyle,
I mean, Motti was famous in the game when he ended up, I think it was Romania
that all came out, didn't they? And they all dyed their hair blonde and had it
cut short, and it was almost impossible to tell one footballer from another, but
somehow he managed, which summed him up in many ways. Well, he did it for a very
long time, I mean, his career in sport was an extremely long time, it was five
decades. And obviously he commentated on a lot of your own goals. I mean, do you
have a favourite one, a favourite moment of being commentated on by Jon Motsen?
I think the one you just highlighted, funnily enough, because you don't get too
many goals bigger than scoring a World Cup semi-final with 10 minutes to go
against Germany when you're one down. So, yeah, and again, I mean, obviously
it's not something I heard at the time. I know he's got quite a loud voice, but
I couldn't have heard him from the back of the stand. But obviously it was, I've
seen it hundreds and hundreds of times and heard it hundreds and hundreds of
times subsequently. And he absolutely nails it. Yeah, he does. Gary, thanks so
much for that. Gary Lineker there, remembering Jon Motsen, who has died aged 77.
Never mind all quiet on the Western Front. If you want to see what mass death on
the battlefield looks like, you only have to follow the war in eastern Ukraine.
There, Russian soldiers are dying in their droves as they try to break through
Ukrainian lines. Uniquely, many of them are recruited and employed by a private
army, the Wagner Group. So what is the Wagner Group? Who is the man who leads
it? And might Wagner be more of a danger than an asset for Vladimir Putin? To
find out, join me, David Aronovich, in the briefing room at eight o'clock
tonight on Radio 4. Now, later in this programme, by the way, we're going to be
looking at a question relating to important social skills. It's arisen out of a
column in The Guardian that asked how you should best go about initiating a
conversation with someone you don't know. You know the situation, we've all been
there. You find yourself at a party surrounded by strangers. How should you go
about saying hello to someone? We're going to be talking about it at the end of
the programme. But if you have a tried and tested piece of advice, do let us
know and we'll come back to it. PM at BBC.co.uk or do tweet to our account at
BBC PM. Now, it's 27 minutes to six. You are listening to PM and we'll have a
summary of the news from Tina Ritchie. Three men have been arrested by
detectives in Northern Ireland investigating the shooting of an off-duty police
officer in County Tyrone last night. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell was
attacked while with his young son at a sports centre in Oma. Two gunmen opened
fire and continued to shoot at him as he lay on the ground. Mr Caldwell is in a
critical but stable condition in hospital. Police say the dissident Republican
group, the new IRA, is the primary focus of the inquiry. The United Nations
General Assembly is now considering a resolution calling for Russia to withdraw
from all Ukrainian territory and for hostilities to end. Major powers like India
and South Africa have abstained on similar votes previously, while Moscow's
allies oppose it. The vote has no legal standing but is considered to be an
important measure of international opinion. The number of asylum seekers waiting
for a decision on their case in the UK has risen to record levels, with around
166,000 people in the backlog. Almost 110,000 of them have been waiting for
longer than six months. Rishi Sunak has pledged to eradicate much of the backlog
by the end of the year. The Home Office has said it will allow 12,000 people to
undergo a speedier claims process, which wouldn't include an interview. The
Labour leader Sakir Starmer says the UK is being held back by short-term
obsessions and has set out five missions if his party wins the next general
election. They include fixing problems in the NHS, making Britain a clean energy
superpower and securing the highest sustained growth in the G7 group of
countries. The European Commission has told its staff to remove the Chinese-
owned app TikTok from their official phones and other devices because of
security concerns. There are increasing fears among Western governments that
Beijing could use popular Chinese software and hardware as tools for spying.
TikTok said the move was misguided. And the football commentator John Motson,
hugely popular with generations of fans during a 50-year career with the BBC,
has died at the age of 77. Motson, known as Motti, retired in 2018 after
covering 10 World Cups, 10 European Championships, 29 FA Cup finals and more
than 200 England matches. Thank you, Tina. Now, Labour are 28 points ahead of
the Conservatives in the latest YouGov poll. I think you could call that a
comfortable lead. With an election in, say, 18 months, it is surely Labour's to
lose at this point. So maybe the right thing for Labour to do is to say as
little as possible in order not to scare off voters while sounding like they're
saying a lot. Now, there's been a bit of that accusation thrown at the party
today as it set out five missions, five broad goals, largely uncontroversial and
at this point rather vague. Can we blame politicians for being bland if they
fear they'll be reduced by being interesting? Let us talk it all through with
the Shadow Health Secretary, Wes Streeting, and welcome back to PM. Wes, thanks
for joining us. No problem. I'm trying not to be bland. No, well, you're never
bland. Let's just ask, are you expecting to win the next general election now?
I've been a Labour Party member for over 20 years. I never expect the Labour
Party to win the next general election. We know how hard it is. There's no room
for complacency. And we're very sincere in saying that. I think one of the
reasons we've set out these missions today is to both give people a clear sense
of the priorities of a Labour government and also to reassure those voters, I
think particularly those who are really cynical about politics and politicians,
that we're not pretending there's a Labour magic wand where we can fix all of
the problems of the country overnight, but with a serious focus, with the right
set of priorities and a degree of honesty about the long term nature of these
challenges, the need to move away from sticking plaster politics and to fix the
fundamentals, hopefully, as well as building support for a Labour government, we
can also rebuild some trust in politics itself, because I think the biggest
opponent of Labour at the next election isn't actually the Conservative Party.
It's cynicism and a degree of hopelessness that politics can't fix anything
anymore. And I think we've got to give Britain not just its future back, but its
hope back and a belief that politics can be part of the solution, not simply
driving the problems. Well, I think many would say when you have bland goals
like we'll make Britain improve growth and we'll reduce health inequalities, and
you don't put any detail or any flashy policies to grab the public's imagination
on those, that you're not really kind of beating apathy and disenchantment with
politics. You're kind of accentuating it. No one can really relate to these
objectives if you don't have policies to deliver them. Right, well, hang on a
second, Evans, because firstly, the ambition of securing the highest sustained
growth in the G7 is a big ambition. Well, it's an ambition, but there's no
policy to deliver it. When Keir and Rachel outlined it at the Shadow Cabinet, I
was one of those people who did a kind of like, gosh, that's ambitious. But it's
the right ambition. Similarly, making Britain a clean energy superpower, zero
carbon electricity by 2030. That is really difficult to achieve, the right thing
to do, possible to do. But it requires you to pull together the different levers
of government, particularly around planning, around skills, and working in
partnership with business to leverage in the expertise and the investment and
the focus to deliver that goal. The policies will, in terms of the specific
pledges and the retail offer, that will follow. I promise that will follow. But
I don't think it's bland to say that we'll deliver the highest sustained growth
in the G7. It's bloody ambitious, actually, and it's the right ambition to have.
And you are going to tell us how you will deliver that, because obviously
everybody would love that. I could say I'm going to deliver 10% growth
sustained. And if I don't tell you how I'm going to do it, there's no argument.
How do you even counter that? I mean, it's highly unlikely, by the way, that we
can beat American growth because their population grows much faster than ours
and their economy tends to grow faster as the population grows. These are the
forces of cynicism we are going to have to defeat in the next election, Evan.
But let me give you an example from my own patch in terms of the NHS, to give
you an example of what we mean. So we could do what the Conservatives do, which
is come out with a few little sticking plaster things to pretend that we've got
an answer for the immediate winter crisis and that will solve all of the
problems. And then we'll be back in the next winter crisis and then the one
after that and the one after that. We've had this pretty much for a decade now.
Instead, what Labour's done is outline a plan to deliver the biggest expansion
of the NHS workforce in history, doubling the number of medical school places,
increasing nursing and midwifery clinical training places by 10,000 a year, as
well as roles like district nursing and health visiting to do more in the
community. We've shown how we'd pay for it, what it would do. One of the
criticisms we've had actually is, yes, but it takes years to train these people.
Well, exactly. So we need to start now. Jeremy Hunt should do it in the budget.
He should nick our plan. We know he supports it. He said he supports it. And,
you know, that's the sort of approach we need from government if we're serious
about not stumbling from one crisis to another. And, you know, the Conservatives
stumbled from one prime minister to another, one chancellor to another. And look
what it's done for business confidence, for inward investment, to consumer
confidence. And even more devastatingly, look at what it's done to the pockets
of families who are struggling right across the country. So that's why we're
taking a serious, long-term, mission-driven approach. Of course, there'll be the
retail policies, the manifesto policies and the yardstick that people can judge
a first-term Labour government against so they can decide whether to give us a
second term. But I think we're right to take this serious, long-term approach.
And I hope that gives me some confidence. No one will say don't take a long-term
approach, I'm quite sure. Now, I'm really interested in the kind of the money
issue there. We've had another report today actually from the Institute for
Government on the tracking the state of public services. And it's not just the
schools, NHS, the ones that you mentioned in your five missions. I mean, they
talk about prisons, insufficient capacity at the moment to offer pre-pandemic
standards of rehabilitation. Very high backlogs in courts, for example. In the
Crown Court, 63,000 backlog in September. That's higher than any point since
2000. I just, I don't know how you're going to deliver anything like the vision
you have without essentially transferring quite large amounts, maybe 1, 2, 3% of
national income into public services. Investment matters, but so does reform,
Evan. And even if the economy and the public finances weren't in the state that
the Conservatives have left them in, we would need to reform our public
services. But it is because our public finances are in such a mess that reform
has to do even more of the heavy lifting. And that's why I've been very upfront
with health and social care leaders about the fact we are going to have to look
at how we deal with the fundamental challenges facing the NHS, to reform the way
that it works and to reform where the money currently goes. Because I genuinely
think, I really genuinely think, even if Rachel Reeves threw her fiscal rules in
the bin and said, go crazy on the NHS, where's poor loads of money into
hospitals, which she wouldn't, by the way. She'd probably be spitting her coffee
out as she listens to this. Even if I poured loads more money into hospitals, I
wouldn't deliver the kind of results that patients need, because we've got to
reform primary care and to fix the front door to the NHS. We've got to deal with
delayed discharges through reform in social care too. Investment matters, and we
will have fully costed, fully funded pledges in our manifesto, as well as trying
to leverage in more inward investment from the private sector too across the
economy. But we've got to do the reform as well. And that was the lesson of the
last Labour government. Investment and reform delivers results. And by goodness,
you're right to outline the scale of the challenge, Evan, because with respect
to the new Labour generation and the 1997 team, what the next Labour government
will inherit if we win the next general election will be even worse, even
harder. And that's why Keir Starmer's right to be clear about what the missions,
the focus, the long term answers are to the fundamental problems that the
Conservatives have created for this country. Clearly a lot of stress in public
services. I just wanted to ask you one last question, if I could, Wes. You're a
gay Christian, and I imagine you've been watching the SNP's leadership election.
Kate Forbes, deeply, someone of deep faith, who said she would never have
supported gay marriage and has perhaps done some damage to her leadership
campaign for that. And others say, well, that means you can't be a Christian.
We're driving Christians out of public life. I just wonder what your thoughts
were on that whole debate. I feel really sad, if I'm honest. I feel really sad
watching the whole thing play out. It's not that people with sincerely held
traditional orthodox religious views can't play a role in public life or
political leadership. It's that if we take a view that politicians shouldn't
legislate for religious belief and to interfere in the practice of churches or
mosques or synagogues and so on, people with sincerely held orthodox religious
beliefs shouldn't impose their beliefs on others through legislation and public
policy. That's the distinction. I'm not interested in applying tests of faith on
politicians who hold religious views. I'm very happy to discuss my own religious
beliefs and my own theology. I'm prepared to do God in the way that Alistair
Campbell famously advised Tony Blair not to. But I take a liberal secular view
in terms of how I cast my vote as a legislator. I do think it is perfectly
reasonable, if uncomfortable, to challenge people like Kate Forbes on whether or
not she would impose her religious views on others. In the same way, I think it
is perfectly reasonable to ask Hamza Yousif, if he supports equal marriage, as
he says he does, why did he abstain in the vote when everyone knows he was in
the Scottish Parliament that day? It's all very well being courageous about
equality after the battle's been fought and won, but where were you, Hamza, when
the battle was ongoing? But anyway, we love converts and we love to the cause,
so it's great to see him onside now, I suppose. Wes Streeting, Shadow Health
Secretary, thanks so much for joining us. Now, it's quarter to six. Let's have a
last look at some other headlines. Here's Tina. The Scottish Finance Secretary,
Kate Forbes, says she's greatly burdened that some of her comments during the
SNP leadership contest have caused hurt. Ms Forbes said she would have voted
against gay marriage had she been an MSP in 2014. Experts are examining concerns
that high street nasal decongestants could have rare but serious side effects.
One has been found to cause the brain to spasm, which could lead to a stroke.
And a presenter on one of France's top television news channels has been sacked
after he was accused of running reports commissioned by outside interests.
Rashid Mbaki denied taking money for them but admits bypassing editorial
controls. Thank you. Now, yesterday we heard James Sutcliffe on this programme
promoting a plan to build a causeway across the Wash, the estuary between
Lincolnshire and Norfolk. In one project, he was aiming to build a roadway, a
flood protection scheme, a tidal power station and a container port. Many
listeners emailed to voice their objection to the idea. We voiced some of those
up. Dear PM, given that the Wash is a marine area of such environmental
significance, will you also be featuring an item on the environmental
consequences of such a scheme? How disappointing was your item about a causeway
across the Wash? There was no questioning about the environmental implications
or why we should need another container terminal. I was upset, concerned and so
disappointed to hear the one-sided broadcast about the proposed Wash barrier on
this evening's PM programme from Skegness. It was factually incorrect and failed
to even mention the complete ecological collapse that would occur if this
barrier were placed across this internationally critical and nature-rich space.
Well, let us give a right of reply to the birds of the Wash because we're going
to talk to Steve Rowland, the RSPB's area manager for that area. And Steve, I
think you didn't really agree with James Sutcliffe that this is a good idea.
Absolutely not, Evan. It was really shocking to hear some of the claims he had
made because as your listeners wrote in, the Wash is our most important estuary
for wild birds. It's of global significance for these long-distance migrants.
They depend on the ebb and flow of the tide and the free flow of water from the
four rivers that drain about 15% of England's landmass through the Wash because
that creates a wonderful food-rich environment. And that food isn't just about
the birds, Evan. It's also about people and their livelihoods. So the fishing
industry that depends on the ebb and flow of the tide, the ports in Kingsland
and Boston that depend on the channels being kept open by that flow of water,
the people who depend on the salt marshes and the mudflats acting as sea
defences and also as massive carbon sinks. And if we can't protect a wetland of
that level of importance with every protective designation that we've come up
with as a nation because we're proud of such places, then we're not going to
save the climate and the nature crisis by pouring concrete over it, over some of
our most precious and beautiful landscapes. And that's leaving aside all of the
comments about whether or not you need a port and all the rest of it. It would
be, and we know it's environmentally destructive. We've got evidence from
elsewhere in the world. Steve, we're going to leave it there. You've made your
point and you've made lots of other people wrote in to make that point. We've
started an interesting debate on that. Steve Rowland from the RSPB. Thank you
very much. Now, the tomato crisis, the shortages of them in British shops, along
with other salad and some veg items. Whenever we talk about this, we are
assailed by tweets from those on the anti-Brexit side of the argument,
suggesting the problem is not affecting other countries, so it must be down to
Brexit. The official line from retailers here is that supply chains have been
hit by bad weather in Spain and North Africa. But can we say Brexit has made it
worse? We thought a quick fact check might be useful here. Theo Leggett is the
BBC's international business correspondent. Come on, Theo, tell us what to
think. OK, well, there's no doubt that the weather has had a huge impact here
and not just over the past few weeks. Over months, there have been extreme
weather events that have affected crops, not just in the UK, but across Europe.
It's all come to a head over the past few weeks because there's been
simultaneous bad weather in Spain. That was cold weather, flooding in Morocco.
Normally, we would have some domestic production at the moment in greenhouses.
But high energy costs have meant that farmers are reluctant to grow. They've
deferred planting their crops in order to save money. It's been the same thing
in the Netherlands. So there's less stuff coming onto the market. And that is
pretty certain. What is also certain is that the shortages that we've seen in
the UK are not being replicated across Europe. And that's why we've had this
chorus of people saying that it's all about Brexit. The question is, is it? In
terms of goods coming into the UK, there aren't really many restrictions at the
moment. Fresh produce is subject to... This is crucial because I can't think why
you wouldn't be getting stuff in because of Brexit. Getting stuff out into the
EU might be difficult, but getting stuff in shouldn't be difficult. Getting
stuff in is not a problem if you pay enough. That's what importers are saying at
the moment. And that price is an important thing. There are no border checks on
fresh produce at the moment. You have to have customs declarations. So there's a
bit of bureaucracy, but not a massive amount. But you have to remember in this
country, supply chains are longer. There's a sea border to negotiate. There is a
little bit of bureaucracy as well. And I've been talking to people in Brussels.
And I've been talking to the COPA COSICA, which is the grouping of European
farmers unions. And they say, well, there aren't huge obstacles to trading with
the UK, but it is simpler to do business in the single market. Supply chains are
shorter. They're more coordinated. It's basically easier. So if you have a limit
on supply, then it's easier to do business in Europe. And of course, many of
these countries have domestic production. Spain will feed its own market before
the export market. So all of these things come together. And also the UK market
is very price sensitive. As Therese Coffey pointed out in the House of Commons
today, a lot of supermarkets operate on fixed price contracts with very low
prices. European retailers tend to allow more variation. So all of these things
come together, which means that there is a Europe-wise shortage. But shortages
in the shops. That's it. Thank you so much, Theo. I just want to play a quick
clip. You mentioned Therese Coffey. She's got into a bit of a bind. She's been
accused of telling us to eat turnips. Just thought you might want to hear the
clip because she says we should be eating more seasonally. It's important to
make sure that we cherish the specialisms that we have in this country. A lot of
people would be eating turnips right now rather than thinking necessarily about
aspects of lettuce and tomatoes and similar. But I'm conscious that consumers
want a year round choice. And that is what our supermarkets and food and
growers, food producers and growers around the world try to satisfy. Well,
politicians mentioned turnips at their peril. And she has been mocked today for
mentioning turnips as an alternative to tomatoes. Our colleague at Radio 5 Live,
Adrian Charles, has a weekly column in The Guardian. It tends to steer away from
the heavy stuff in that paper and focus on the everyday and the more personal.
And his latest one provoked a big conversation in the PM office. Adrian
basically argues in it. It's very difficult when you're at a party to start a
conversation with someone you don't know. Really difficult if you don't know
anybody at all. It turns out almost everybody finds the same, at least our
colleagues do. Adrian joins us now and we are going to introduce someone to
guide him in this awkward matter. But first, Adrian, we should say you're
generally quite lucky because people will recognise you from your TV career. And
they will walk up to you, presumably. Yes, they come up and say hello. And I
like having conversations. And the conversation itself, I'm fine with. You know,
I just like talking to people. If they ask me about myself, I like talking about
myself. Who doesn't? But I don't know how to start a conversation anymore. I
always find it difficult. But I don't have to do it, at least when I'm in this
country, because I'm generally quite well known. So people will recognise me.
And, you know, then off you go. I really don't know. I don't know how you do it.
No, how you do it. No. And you said you got caught at a party of the Croatian
Davis Cup team who didn't know you at all. I could even speak the language. No,
I could speak the language. But they didn't recognise me and start anything with
me. What do you do? Just go straight up to somebody, shake hands. Hi. Good
question. Now, look, we have somebody to help you. Celeste Headley, who is a
broadcaster, author of We Need to Talk. How to Have Conversations That Matter.
Celeste, thank you for joining us on PM. However, we don't want to know how to
have conversations that matter. We want to know how to start conversations that
maybe don't even matter. What is the answer to Adrian's conundrum? OK, so the
secret to starting a conversation with anybody at all is take a look at them,
notice some things about them, the type of clothes they're wearing, if they have
a tattoo, jewellery, are they reading a book, are they holding their cell phone
and start asking them specific questions. I mean, I boil it down to this. Ask
them questions they know the answer to about something they care about. So you
could even start by admitting, you know, if I were at that party, I would say, I
feel awkward. I hate these things. I don't know how to make small talk anymore.
Tell me about something that you care about. So, yeah, if you ask questions, the
burden is off you to hold up your end of the conversation. And as he mentioned,
people like to talk about themselves. So you'll probably be OK. But it's still
starting. I mean, what you've advised may work, but equally, you know, if I go
up to someone, I can't go bowling up to somebody and say, hi, tell me about
something you care about. I just can't. It's not, you know, it might be an
American thing over here. I think I kind of struggle. It's the it's the opening
gambit. So you actually can. And this works in almost every culture. I'll give
you an example. I was at a TED conference and a Japanese scientist came up to me
and asked me this very question. How do I start conversations? And I said, well,
where are you from? And he said Kyoto. And I said, you know, I've never been
there. You know, tell me what it's like. I've only ever been to Tokyo. And he
started describing Kyoto. And I said, you know, but Tokyo is so cramped. All the
apartments are so small. Is that how Kyoto is like? And he starts explaining.
And I was like, do you have dogs and yards? And, you know, what does the street
look like? And he starts explaining. And about five minutes in, I said, that's
how you start a conversation. That's how you get it started. I can do that bit.
But that is the conversation. I can do all that bit easily. It's the very first
thing. You're embarrassed, Adrian, to sidle up to people and sort of look like
you're kind of trying to get in with them because they and that's the bit. If
you're shy, that is the hardest part of it. Well, I think I think it's kind of
could you say what just one thing that occurred to me since I wrote the piece is
that we've all got kind of a responsibility. It's not about the person wanting
to start the conversation. It's about everyone else being open to having the
conversation started. So when you're in a situation like that, maybe you're in a
conversation, you know, just meet the eye of somebody who's on their own. Maybe
just a little raise of the eyebrow to indicate you are welcome to start to come.
You know, come on in. Absolutely. We did ask. We asked listeners for some ideas.
Margaret said, raise the topic of dentistry. Everyone has personal experience in
their own. Jenny suggests, well, how are you? I mean, I just any of you got any
problems with your teeth? Well, you see, I think it makes it does show you how
difficult this can be. Douglas Turner, who listens in California, said here in
the States, it's very simple. Just ask how much income they make. Yeah, that is
a good one. But that might be seen in truth. Jenny said, what is you what is
your most remembered childhood experience? Again, I think that's going in a bit
deep, isn't it, Celeste? You it's got to be something fairly light and trivial,
doesn't it? It really does. I mean, not everybody is open to and we're talking
about Brits and I don't mean to stereotype you, but most British people I know
are not ready to jump into their memories of childhood. So I would just say that
it really doesn't have to be nuclear science. You know, to speaking of science,
research shows us that people are much more open to conversation than we think.
And they enjoy our conversation and our company way more than we realize. We get
so caught up in believing we're awkward that that's awkwardness is not something
the other person perceives. All right. Well, that's a good point on which to
finish. Thanks so much, Celeste Headley and Adrian. Good luck with your your
parting. Now, it's a couple of minutes to six. Let's get some weather. Here's
Chris Fawkes. Well, thanks a lot, Evan. And we've got some cloud and rain
working across northern Scotland at the moment. And for the far north of
Scotland, gusty winds as well, just running into the 50s of miles an hour at the
moment. But what's going to happen as we go on through the course of the next
few hours is those strongest of wind will tend to weaken. But a band of rain
will push its way southwards across Scotland. Now, ahead of that feature for
Northern Ireland, it's going to be quite cloudy tonight. There could be an odd
spit of rain. England and Wales will have some clear skies for a time, and that
will allow an early touch of frost to develop. And indeed, the frost will hang
on into southern parts of England by temperatures get down to about minus three
degrees Celsius across northern England, Wales, the north Midlands and parts of
East Anglia. It will tend to turn cloudier overnight and that will tend to lift
the temperatures. So the frost lifting away by the time we get to tomorrow
morning. Now, tomorrow, I think for Northern Ireland, for England and Wales,
we're looking at a cloudy start to the day. And there will be a few patches of
light rain coming and going for Scotland, a brighter start with some sunshine,
but a few showers across northern and eastern parts of the country. And those
bright conditions will push southwards through the day. So eventually we'll see
some sunny spells getting in across Northern Ireland and across England and
Wales. Mind you, there will be a cold wind with us across northern and eastern
areas through the day. Evan. Thanks, Chris. That's PM. Frank McWheaney was the
studio director, Scott Adam, our editor. After the news, don't forget to listen
to Meet Dave Sedaris back on Radio 4.