TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 begins tomorrow evening at 8.45 BBC News at 8 o'clock Iran is again facing
questions about its nuclear program after the UN watchdog the IAEA found highly
enriched uranium particles at one of its facilities in a report seen by the BBC
the agency said the particles were close to weapons grade Iran denies trying to
make a nuclear bomb Bethany Bell reports from the Austrian capital Vienna where
the watchdog is based. The IAEA said it has asked Iran to explain the origin of
the particles of uranium which were enriched up to 83.7 percent purity weapons-
grade uranium is 90 percent the particles were found earlier this year at the
Fordow nuclear site which is dug into a mountain the report said Iran had
informed the agency that unintended fluctuations in enrichment levels may have
occurred Eurosceptic conservative MPs in the group known as the ERG have asked
lawyers to carry out a detailed study of Rishi Sunak's trade deal for Northern
Ireland they've warned the analysis could take longer than a fortnight the group
was addressed by the Democratic Unionist leader Sir Geoffrey Donaldson Mr. Sunak
needs the DUP to support the deal to revive power sharing in Northern Ireland
police say a couple who disappeared with their newborn baby in January are now
being questioned on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter Constance Martin
who's 35 and 48-year-old Mark Gordon were arrested after being spotted in
Brighton last night. Officers are searching for the child on the Sussex Downs
results from Nigeria's presidential election suggest Bola Tinabu, the candidate
from its governing party is on course to win. The opposition has attacked the
poll as a sham and claimed results are being manipulated. Jodie Comer who
starred in the TV series Killing Eve is up for Best Actress at this year's
Olivia Theatre Awards. Paul Mescal, David Tennant and Tom Hollander are among
the nominations for Best Actor My Neighbour Totoro, an adaptation of the
Japanese animated film, leads the field with nine nominations BBC News. There's
a travel theme to In Touch in 40 minutes here on Radio 4 we'll be hearing about
an instance where a guide dog owner encountered difficulties passing through
airport security and what steps are being taken to avoid the same thing
happening again. And on the railways there's news of a new messaging service
through which disabled passengers can get help before, during and after their
train journeys and we'll also have an update on the state of the tactile paving
installations taking place across the rail network. All that on tonight's In
Touch with Peter White in around 40 minutes. First, File on Four and Rachel
Stonehouse follows the last known movements of the missing professional rugby
union player Levi Davis who disappeared in Barcelona last year. Levi's bag that
he left here is his England bag. So it's basically when you play age grade or
senior rugby for your country they tend to give you what rugby players call
stash. So all your kits. So like effectively your work gear but we'll call it
stash. So we love it. It's like your free tops or your shorts or your trackies,
your jumpers, your jackets, the lots. Mike Guida reaches across for a huge
England rugby bag. And this was his bag from when he went to South Africa. It
belongs to his friend Levi Davis, crammed full of his belongings and the
memories that go with it. He's still got his tag on there from when he flew over
to X-Factor, San Francisco. So he took this bag with him and it's just full of
all his old things. So it's like it's just full to the brim of what I would say
is a small version of his life. I've got his old speaker in here for when he
does his music. Got some of his clothes, his rugby kit, his boxing gloves, which
he was getting really into. It's got all his documents for social services. His
whole life in a binder, living out of a bag can be tough. But at the same time,
I think he relished it. He liked being on the move. He liked having that
freedom. So this bag has done a lot of miles with him. 24-year-old Levi is a
professional rugby player who started a new career in music. But then he went
missing four months ago, leaving his friends and family desperate for answers.
What are you going to do with it? At the moment, I'm not too sure. It's always
there. It's always a memory. Not always a good one, but not always a bad one. I
think probably hold on to it for a bit longer until maybe I get it back to back
home. For now, I think I'm just going to sit on it and hope that he's going to
come pick it up. Mike's not the only one hoping Levi will walk back through the
door. You want an answer. And the longer that time goes on, the more crazy your
head goes and stories start whirling. All we want is peace and we just want to
be a normal family again. I would say to him, don't be afraid, Levi. We only
want to find you. That's all. Levi disappeared in Barcelona on the 29th of
October last year. Having arrived there just a few hours before from Ibiza, he
sent this WhatsApp voice note to Mike that night. Hey mate, we're just ringing
to show you some sights. Absolutely beautiful down here, man. It's amazing.
Literally just getting all my inspo. I love it. So good. This is the last time
anyone heard from him. He was declared a missing person. The police started
investigating. And that's when I first reported on the story. It's now almost
five weeks since 24 year old Levi was last seen on CCTV here at the old Irish
pub in a touristy part of the city. But the more I reported on Levi's
disappearance, the more questions I had. And then a video emerged earlier this
month. Hello. My name is Levi Davis and my life is in danger. We'll come to that
later. The recent case of Nicola Bulley, who went missing in Lancashire, has
raised questions about the dangers of rumour and speculation and how publicity
can be a double edged sword, especially for those closest to the person who's
missing. Mommy's boy. Which other ones have you got of Levi? Got that one. We're
in Solihull just outside Birmingham with Levi's grandma Mavis and mum Julie.
Mavis's living room walls are all filled with pictures of her family through the
years. Some are in black and white and there's a huge portrait of Levi, his mum
and brothers, which was taken about a year ago. Oh, this is Levi at school. How
old is he in that picture? He'll be about five. Yeah. Yeah. People are coming
and going the whole time we're here. And Mavis jokes it's like Birmingham New
Street station. There's also a smoke detector which beeps every so often. We
talk about family life. The school was just down here. And then they all play
together and we all cook together. And then you used to call him chicken leg.
That's because like when he was born and he was so small. So he was a premium
baby. He was like only six weeks prem and literally weighed three pounds
fifteen. So my dad would say, oh my God, look at his legs. They'd call him. Oh,
look at these chicken legs. Of course, he got a lot bigger as he got older,
right? We show Mavis a video we found on Levi's social media. No way. This one
reminds me of Sunday school. Church. Mavis Davis by Grumbach. What a name for a
rock star famous in the church. You'd be rocking out to this one. Here we go.
Levi's mid-workout when this song comes on, his energy and warmth are
infectious. Oh, Levi. What do you make of that, Mavis? What he does there is
real. What he shows there is real. Oh, my life. And he talks about you rocking
out at church. I know, that's what he does. Oh, bless him. Going for it there,
isn't it? He's really going for it. Beautiful. That is Levi, OK? And that's
Grandma. Things haven't always been easy for Julie and her family, though. Levi
spent some of his childhood in foster care. The fact that he had to go in care,
it really tore me apart. Of course, circumstances behind that was, you know, I'd
had sort of really not very good relationship with his dad and things had broken
down and I was left very traumatized, very hard, very hard going. I did
absolutely everything to get him home. But I think by the time I was better and
things had gotten better at home, he'd already kind of settled. At that point,
he'd gone to Denston College and got noticed for his, you know, sports
abilities. And I just thought, you know, it just made sense for him to just stay
where he was and I would be there sort of supporting him. When he was in Bath,
his mum went to see him play rugby. And Julie really supported Levi all the way,
all the way, till this day. The next station is Tuk'in. Producer Ailis Hart and
I set about piecing together Levi's last known movements and try and understand
the complexity of what happens when someone goes missing overseas without a
trace. We are on our way to go see Mike. They're pretty much in contact every
single day right up until the day he disappeared as well. So they spoke that
evening. I suppose in terms of the nuts and bolts of what we need to cover, I
think it is those last movements, what he was thinking, what he was saying. I
suppose what kind of frame of mind he was in as to whether or not he had any
foresight about what was going to happen. So we come straight out the front
door, walk straight onto the golf course and just have a wander up and down,
which was quite, quite lovely. So there were times kind of late at night, if we
were up chatting, we'd go and sit on the bunkers. So there were times we
wouldn't say a word to each other and we'd just walk. We're in a village in
Berkshire. It's not that far from London, but it feels it. On the edge of a golf
course, you can hear the birds singing. It's still and peaceful. Levi would
often come here to stay with Mike. There were a lot of people who were surprised
we were friends, even from the beginning. And yet our personalities were very,
very similar. And I think that's why we bounced off one another. Mike and Levi
met at university in Bath while playing rugby seven years ago. They hit it off
immediately, bonding over a mutual dislike of yoga. He was, I'd say, the jester
of our group. He loved to have a laugh and to really pick things up for people
with a smile. But it would never be at anybody else's detriment. It was always
kind of almost self-deprecating or always ready to make somebody else smile
first. He was like another brother. I struggled with depression and anxiety for
quite a while. Got to a very dark place at university. Levi, he was one of the
people that were there for me the whole time. Levi is Mike's best mate, but he's
also a pretty remarkable guy. He played rugby union for Premier League team Bath
and England under-19s. But that's not his only talent. He appeared on Celebrity
X Factor in 2019 and went on to sign a record deal. He also became the first
rugby union player in history to come out as bisexual. So this was his first
Vogue magazine that he got with his double spread in there. It was about him
coming out and he asked me to hold on to it until he comes back and picks it up.
So I know it's important to him, whether it be a symbol of him coming out or
something that he's holding on to or something that he just feels proud of. That
Vogue article was published in June 2021. But more recently, Levi had been
struggling. Mike tells me it wasn't until they'd come home from a night out
while eating a Chinese takeaway at 3am. He realised just how much. And then kind
of out of nowhere, he starts slowly getting into himself a bit more. I sort of
realised that he was getting upset. He goes, mate, I'm struggling about some
stuff. He started to open up a bit, but he was saying that he thought he's being
blackmailed. He thinks he's being followed. He thinks his people are after him.
So I'm thinking, oh, mate, we're just, you know, we've had a few too many. It's
one of those moments. But I'd only ever seen him cry maybe twice. And this was
probably the second time. And he broke down with his head on my shoulder and was
like sobbing. At the time, Mike didn't know what to make of it. Now he can't get
his head around what's happened since they had that conversation. It seems like
between leaving university and then starting X Factor, things were fine. And
then kind of from the X Factor, meeting people that way in a different
limelight, maybe, you know, under the eye of a lot more people doing those
shows, seems like things have gone downhill for him, whereas they should have
been going uphill. And reflecting back, do you think he changed during that
time? I don't think he changed, not with me at least. I don't think he changed
with me or our friends. But I'd say he definitely seems like he's got himself
into this bad place where some of these things could have happened. Mike says
Levi seemed a little lost, but mentioned plans to go to Ibiza and time out to
focus on his songwriting. Levi came to Mike's birthday in early October, and
that was the last time he saw him. What's really important is for the
investigators to have an open mind, consider all possibilities, to look at all
potential information and all the potential scenarios. Charlie Hedges set up a
police expert network for missing people across Europe. He has more than 30
years' experience in the police, including with the National Crime Agency. It's
a fascinating case with lots of nuances to it. It's complicated. All those
different things, they're all different parts of the jigsaw puzzle, need to be
looked at and understood, whether they belong to this puzzle or another one, how
they fit together. And so what's critical is to be able to evaluate their value
and their worth by corroborating or looking for other factors that tell you
whether they're truth or fiction. Around 600 British people go missing overseas
every year, according to figures from the Foreign Office. And because they're
abroad, it adds extra layers of complication. So in international cases, the
problems are amplified. First of all, we have language challenges, we have a
completely different judicial system, and the way the police operates is very
different in European countries to the way it happens in the UK. The primary
responsibility for the investigation will sit with the Spanish police, because
that's where he went missing. And has Brexit had an impact on all of this? Well,
it's taken us away from the Syrian information system, where it was possible for
the UK police to put a missing person or a wanted person onto that system, and
they would be automatically flagged to all police forces in Europe. So we have
lost that. So we have to revert to the traditional method of notifying Interpol,
who can issue a yellow notice to warn police forces in other countries about a
missing person, and they will facilitate communication between the two
countries. If you asked, you're looking into the case, what would you do? Try to
talk to people. They will sometimes divulge things that they wouldn't tell a
police officer. The critical thing is trying to find out as much as you can
about the person and their life, and to understand what may have been going on
to cause them to disappear, because people don't go missing without a reason.
Well, a very warm welcome to Ibiza Airport, where the local time here is 12.42
in the afternoon, and the outside temperature is 13 degrees. Before Levi went
missing, he came here, to the island of Ibiza. This is where he last spent time
with friends before he disappeared, and where we now begin to trace his last
known movements....and open the overhead lockers, that's just items made move.
We rent a hire car for our time on the island. Nice inconspicuous orange car.
Lucky we're not deep, deep undercover. In half a mile, at the roundabout, take
the fourth exit onto EI 900 towards Sacanao. We're heading to Ibiza town to meet
a friend of Levi's. His name's Richard Squire, and Levi was actually staying
with Richard for a couple of weeks in Ibiza before he disappeared. So he's
pretty key to this story in terms of being the last person, certainly that we
know of, who saw Levi before he got on that boat to Barcelona, and ultimately
disappeared. Continue straight on. Richard hasn't spoken publicly before, but
has agreed to talk to Phylon 4. So he would have come down here in the morning?
Well, yeah, he would have had to walk all the way down here, and all the way
around the other side, and it's that building at the far end. So you have the
hotel, is the one you can see, the black and white, and then it's just further
around, near where the lighthouse is, basically, is the main ferry point.
Richard's dressed smartly, in a jacket, and is on a work course smoking a
cigarette when we first meet. Have bebidas, por fa. Do you want to, what are you
going to have to drink? Do you want the menu? No, I'll probably have a coffee, I
think. We sit outside a boutique hotel, a few minutes walk from the marina. It's
a sunny day, but there's a breeze, enough for it to feel chilly. Do you have any
questions? No, no, no, not at all. I mean, the only reason I'm happy to do this
is because I do know X Factor. Yeah, yeah. And it's not about sensationalising
anything. Richard and Levi met around four years ago, through mutual friends, on
the rugby and X Factor scene. I mean, we're in contact a lot anyway, but he
messaged in the beginning of October, said that he wanted to get away for a
little while. So, obviously, I said, yes, that's fine, you can come and stay. He
was waiting for some payments from his last rugby club. So I bought his ticket
and he flew over on October the 17th. How did he seem to you in the couple of
weeks he was with you? He was good. He had issues, for sure, around what he
wanted to do with his career, and maybe he didn't want to be famous, and maybe
he didn't want to be in the public eye. And so we talked about that, but all in
all, he was very excited about work coming up. Levi released his debut track a
month before he travelled to Ibiza. It was a big moment for him. He was due to
release his next single in November, so arranged a photo shoot in Ibiza to
promote it. This is my favourite one. Put the waves and took us ages to get
this. And I'm actually in the water with him because I wanted to do like a
horizon thing, and the sun looked amazing, reflected off the water, but as you
can see, it looks all hazy. This is Ade Adetona. He's a fashion photographer
based in London and became friends with Levi after they worked together on a
photo shoot a few years ago. When I got the call from him to come to Ibiza, I
knew he was already in Ibiza anyway. And so it was just a nice surprise. I had
the blue in fact. Yeah, I was quite, I was like, oh, are you sure? He went,
yeah, I want you to do this. How would you describe Levi as a friend? Funny,
caring, he's a worrier. He does worry about other people a lot. Driven, I mean
engaging, engaging. I mean, he's, you know, he's got a lot to say. He's a very
intelligent guy. You know, when you kind of put all that together, it's not
typical of a 24-year-old. And I guess that's kind of why we became friends. So
yeah. Ade stayed in the same apartment as Levi in Ibiza and says he was busy
scribbling lyrics into a notebook and learning Spanish on his phone. Everything
seemed normal. So yes, I was just all about the work. And so was Levi, you know.
However, he is 24 years old and I am not. So, you know, the pizzazz and stuff, I
could take it or leave it. He must have been there a couple of weeks or a few
weeks before I'd arrived. And when I saw him, he was quite fit. So he was
getting up and doing his circuit training. You know, in those few days that I
was there, there were no alarm bells. All his actions, his dispositions, you
know, his words were, you know, I guess positive, optimistic, looking forward,
driven, you know. I mean, I guess that's why I find it really hard to wrap my
head around, essentially. Since Levi went missing, Ade says he's felt frozen in
time. When someone's missing, it's amorphous. It's no, it's infinite. It's not a
dull throb. It's just like a constant pain. And very difficult to move on and
not think about it when there's so many unanswered questions. It's still quite
visceral for me. It's quite raw in the scale of things. You know, he met me for
a hot minute and he had a very indelible effect on me for the good, you know.
And if I could feel this pain, I'd keep thinking about his family, for instance.
And I think, jeez, if this is hurting like this. Yeah, they're on level 10. By
now, Levi had been on the island for almost two weeks. In that time, Richard
says they hung out, went swimming, to the gym. Levi cooked a spaghetti
bolognese. The thing about Levi, he was very good at keeping different parts of
his life separate. I know that he loved to use online apps for dating and that
he had communicated with several different people. And in passing, he made the
most of the time he had with his family. He had met several different people and
in passing, he made the comment about going off to meet one of those people. On
Friday the 28th of October, 11 days after he'd arrived on the island, Richard
says Levi told him he'd organised to meet someone in Ibiza town for dinner. I
parked in the car park just down the road. We walked here to this traffic light
and the restaurant Levi was going to meet his date is directly ahead and to the
left. We got here and I said to him, OK, have a good night. Give me a call if
you need picking up and I'll speak to you in the morning. And I gave him a hug
and he said, OK, I'll call you later. And that was it. So it was this spot that
we're in now? Yeah, right here. Richard says this was the last time he saw Levi.
He shows me text messages and says when Levi didn't come back from his date the
following morning, he messaged to ask where he was. Levi replied to say he'd
left the island. I was obviously worried for him. I said, gone where? He said,
mainland Europe, Barcelona, going to see some mates. So then I sent him a voice
note saying, you're worrying me, please tell me where you are. And he's like,
hey, sorry, I'm just on the boat. I'm all good. Can I give you a call when I get
there, if that's OK? And he said, yeah, I'll call you at 7.15. And I replied, of
course, I'm here for you. And the last message was me saying to him, are you OK?
And that message never went through. Initially, Richard says he wasn't overly
concerned. But as the days went by with no word back and the message still
undelivered, he started to worry. He was notorious for losing phones and losing
wallets. I've lost his number so many times in the years that I've known him. So
I thought, OK, he's probably lost his phone. I'll message him on Instagram and
I'll send him an email and see what happens. And when nothing was coming through
and nothing was being delivered, it got to the Wednesday. And I thought, this is
just, this isn't normal. This isn't right. By this point, the 3rd of November,
no one had heard from Levi in five days. Richard contacted Levi's family on
social media, called mutual friends. And someone in London who works in PR got
in touch with the papers. In the meantime, I called another friend of mine who
lives in Barcelona and said, I need you to go to the police station and find out
about reporting someone missing. It's such an emotional roller coaster. I'm
dealing with people that I've never met before. You don't know who to trust. You
don't know what information is right, what information is wrong. And it's just
incredibly upsetting. And even though it's, you know, four months, it still
feels like the first day, every day. And it's difficult. It's hard. If you've
been following Levi's story, you will have seen the pictures of him in the
papers. He's standing in the water on this beach that we're looking out on now,
where he's smiling, he's laughing, he's joking. As he look out and see Ibiza
town on the left with the lights twinkling. I guess now I just stand here
thinking about what was going through Levi's mind as he set off on that ferry
from Ibiza to head to Barcelona. The following morning, we make our way to the
main port, a mile or so from the city's waterfront cafes and restaurants.
Carretera embarco, por favor. 45, please. Thank you. Oh, fritos. We're taking
the same eight-hour ferry crossing as Levi. Below deck, before we lose signal, I
make a few calls, including one to a journalist in Barcelona who's been
following the story on the ground from day one. Have they said that to you?
That's interesting. She tells me that on the morning of the 30th of October, the
day after Levi was last seen, a person was spotted in the sea by passengers on
an Italian cruise ship. A life jacket was thrown to them by crew and a search
was launched. Nobody missing, yeah. But later called off when nobody on board
the ship was reported missing. In her mind, that was a big mistake, especially
because Levi's passport was found at the port a few weeks later. No, no, no,
that's all very helpful. No, no, not at all. Thank you so much. On deck, as we
approach Barcelona, I watch a video Levi sent his mum when he was on this
journey, which she shared with me. So he's showing her the view out across the
ocean. He's standing out on the deck and it's really windy, but you can make out
he's saying, Hi, mum. Look, mum, it's beautiful here. Smiling. You can see that
the sun's coming down in the picture, so I'd guess that it's later in the
afternoon, probably quite close towards the end of his journey to Barcelona,
arriving in around seven o'clock. Shortly afterwards, he sent his friend Mike
the first of three voice messages, none of which have been heard before. This
one was sent at 6.51pm. Seriously, Guido, you need to see this, bro. Amazing.
Look at this sunset in a second. I'm going to send you a picture, yeah? And it's
unreal. When he arrived, Levi headed here to Larambola, a boulevard in the heart
of the city. It's a tourist destination full of kiosks, artists and restaurants,
all busy day and night. He came to this bar, the Old Irish Pub, which hosts live
music and shows big sporting events on TV. And it was from here that Levi sent
his friend Mike the second of those voice messages, just after 20 past 10. I
don't think it's an open mic night, mate. I don't think it's open mic, but I
love it. It's actually really, really good, mate. It's incredibly busy in there,
the sport on the TV, but I did speak to one of the managers. They do remember
Levi. He came in, he had a pint, watched sport on the TV, and about 45 minutes
later he was spotted leaving. CCTV cameras captured him leaving the Old Irish
Pub at around 10.30. From here he headed towards Plaza de Cataluña, a short walk
up the road. At one minute past midnight Spanish time, Levi tries to call his
friend Mike, who's back in the UK. But he doesn't pick up, because he's asleep
by then. Three minutes later, he sends him a voice note. Hey, mate, we're just
ringing to show you some sights. Absolutely beautiful down here, man. It's
amazing. Literally just getting all my inspo. I love it. So good. And as far as
we know, that's the last contact that Levi had with any of his friends or
family. His phone hasn't been used since then, and his bank accounts haven't
been used either. It's thought his phone connected to a network near Barcelona's
main railway station soon after that last voice message was left. But since
then, nothing. When the communication just dropped, I thought, my heart just
went, it sank. I thought, what is going on? More than a thousand miles away,
Levi's mum Julie, his grandma Mavis and brother Nathan waited for news. Richard
had messaged Nathan on Instagram. And Nathan said to me, Mum, I don't know who
this is, but he's asking for me to add him. So I said, yeah, just add him. You
never know. It might be something to do with Levi. So he did. And then that was
when Richard said, I don't know where Levi is. Julie tells us Levi's mental
health had deteriorated. He'd been getting treatment in the Midlands and was
making good progress. So when he mentioned his plans to go to Ibiza, she didn't
want him to go. I tried everything. I tried holding back the passport. Not that
you should do that. But as a mum, I was like, I was concerned, you know, I
really tried my best to talk him out of it. But he was adamant. He would say,
don't worry, mum. Don't worry about it. I'll be all right. And that's it. And I
know what I'm doing. And I can look after myself. And but he, because of his
heart, is so such a kind hearted, loving person. I think he's vulnerable. He is,
yeah. But it wasn't until Levi had left to go to Ibiza that he told her he'd run
out of his medication. Julie organised to have more sent out to him. But we
understand it arrived the day after he went missing. Since his disappearance,
the police, both in Spain and in the UK, haven't said much. But that hasn't
stopped a series of stories appearing in the papers and online. Looking here
now, there's one about Levi being kidnapped and another about Somali drug gangs
and a £100,000 debt. It's impossible to separate fact from fiction and
increasingly frustrating for Levi's family. If I had the opportunity to not have
to do this and go on TV, I would just be quite happy to remain in the
background. We are trying to raise awareness of that, the fact that he's
missing. We want him home safe. You know, as to the reason why I'm now having to
do this. You talked, Julie, about trying to keep an open mind when there's so
many rumours and so much speculation going on and so many people getting
involved. Yes, that is so, so true. I like to say that I'd rather stick to
facts. But because of, like you said, there are many different stories coming
from different places. It's very hard to know or distinguish what's true from
what isn't. All I know now is that I can't trust anybody, you know, and what is
going out there, I have to take with a pinch of salt. Don't know what to
believe. What we know for sure is that there was a big gap between when Levi
went missing and when the local police launched their investigation ten days
later. It was quite significant because the early information and the early
opportunities to gather information, evidence, CCTV, forensics, etc. have all
been lost by that time in the majority and witnesses will have moved away. So
it's a critical time in the investigation within the first few hours, let alone
the first few days, and for a ten-day lapse to have occurred. That's quite a big
gap to cover to understand what's happened in between. While the Catalan police
aren't giving much away, they have told us that whilst Levi's disappearance
isn't being treated as a criminal investigation, what they describe as
disturbing issues have emerged that they say have no logical explanation. For
that reason, they say the investigation is being handled by a specialist
criminal division to establish if a crime has been committed. One piece of
evidence that they'll be paying close attention to emerged early in February.
It's a video which Levi recorded before his disappearance. Hello. My name is
Levi Davis and my life is in danger. It's 15 minutes long and the version that
we've seen is in black and white. Levi speaks straight to the camera. He appears
calm, but you can also tell that he's worried as well. In it, he talks about
being blackmailed, about being followed, and to be honest, it is pretty
unsettling to watch. It's hard to know what to make of it as well. Originally,
he had posted it on Instagram just a few days before his disappearance, but he
later deleted it. And he recorded it in my house and we discussed it and I said
to him, what are you trying to achieve with this video? And he's like, I'm
taking back my voice. I'm taking back the power. And I said, well, it comes
across like you're not in a happy place. I said it comes across like, you know,
everything's going wrong. And he's like, no, no, that's not what I mean. It's
just I'm not going to be bullied. I'm not going to be harassed. And then he got
a lot of reaction from it on Instagram. And then he appeared in the kitchen and
said, oh, I've decided to delete that because it wasn't what I was trying to
say. The video, we believe, is part of the investigation into Levi's
disappearance, a part of the jigsaw the police are trying to complete. All cases
are different. Some are really, really simple and easy and you can see through
to what the problems are very quickly and others are incredibly complex. And
it's a real trying to piece together the piece of the jigsaw puzzle and
understand what the picture looks like. For the family, it's just awful. We
sometimes refer to it as ambiguous loss and one's lost in circumstances you
don't really understand. And for them, it's just so, so difficult because
there's no closure. They've just got nothing to pin their hopes on because they
just don't know. And then all the speculation about 101 different things could
have happened. Then it makes it a whole lot worse. Levi's been missing for four
months now. And while rumours whirl on social media and stories about what might
have happened to him make headlines, his family and friends are caught somewhere
between grief and hope. Flicking through his social media, you get a real
impression of who he is. A big hearted guy with a passion for his music. This is
him doing a cover of Mario's Let Me Love You. And while Levi remains missing,
for Grandma Mavis and Mum Julie, they watch and re-watch these videos, hoping
he'll come home. Even though Levi's not here, I'm forever watching these TikTok
videos and stuff. And it just makes me feel so sad. I'm just so sad. You know,
he sing a song when it was on the telly. When I heard it, it was about a few
weeks ago, I started to cry. Oh, when he sing it, Julie, my God, there's a bunch
of angels coming after me, coming for to carry me home. And he sing a song,
Sweet Chariotter, coming for to carry me home. The producer of tonight's
programme was Ailis Hart, the editor was Carl Johnston, and you'll find this and
many more editions of File on 4 on BBC Sounds. Welcome to The Spock. When we're
in the midst of it, we're going to make decisions that are different than the
decisions that we would make if we were looking from the outside in. Bold
thinking for a better world. We struggle to recognise or remember that these
inequalities come from somewhere. That sense of human connection can save a
life. I'm Helen Lewis with a new series of close up conversations. More big
thinkers with big ideas bidding to change our world and hearing some of the
personal reasons behind them. Probably one of the best decisions I've ever made
in my life was making that step. The Spock starts next Tuesday morning at 11 on
Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4, it's time for In Touch with Peter White.
Good evening. Good news and bad tonight on what's turned out to be something of
a travel special. Later on, we'll be hearing about a new dedicated service for
disabled passengers by One Train Company and what they claim it will add to the
assistance already on offer. And the long awaited news that the provision of
tactile paving on platform edges at all railway stations has been significantly
speeded up. Can this new deadline be met? But for one airline passenger, the
experience hasn't been so positive. We're used to hearing on this programme
about visually impaired passengers being left high and dry, waiting to be
escorted to their flights. But what happened recently to Eleanor Burke is a new
one on us. Eleanor travels regularly back and forth between the UK and Ireland
where she has relatives. With her guide dog, normally it's a pretty
straightforward exercise. That is, until what happened to her a few weeks ago.
Eleanor is with us. So just explain what happened and how it differed from what
normally happens and should happen. Good evening, Peter. I travel regularly with
Ryanair and Ryanair have provision, you know, when you're booking your flight on
the booking form, to say if you require assistance. Another requirement from
Ryanair is that you send them all the relevant information in relation to your
guide dog. This includes my pet passport and also the yellow book which is
issued by Guide Dogs UK. And normally this goes quite smoothly. So let me be
clear, Eleanor, do you actually need any physical documents on you as far as the
evidence about your dog is concerned? No, so this is it. So I went to go through
the scanner and the security man asked me if I had a letter from the airline. I
said I didn't have a hard copy letter, but that on my luggage I had all the
relevant passport for the guide dog plus the guide dog's yellow book. He said
no, that wasn't good enough. He wanted a letter. On my phone I had an email from
the accessibility department at Ryanair saying that they were happy for me to
travel with my guide dog. I also then had my boarding pass, which I had in
electronic format. This clearly showed my seat number and that I was traveling
with the guide dog. So as far as you're concerned, at that point you had
everything that you needed. The airline had everything that was needed. So what
went wrong and what happened next? Well, from what I could ascertain, the
security man seemed to have really dug his heels in on this one. He contacted
Ryanair by telephone to find out what was going on. It would appear that he also
contacted the Ryanair representative's ground staff. She then said to me that
traveling in future, I should go to the Ryanair desk once I got to the airport
and I should ask for my boarding pass to be printed out. So this was news to me.
And I had been kept waiting for one hour for all of this. One might expect there
could be up to a 10 minute wait, but never one hour. So I was very upset by
this, but I was really more upset by the way I was being treated. And I just
felt that I wasn't getting the respect, just the respect of one person to
another. I felt that I was being treated in a patronizing way and I felt
powerless. And I know one cannot get short tempered in these situations because
otherwise one is accused of being ill-mannered. So I had to try and go along and
be as patient as possible. But given that you've done this quite a lot of times
before, were you given any explanation of why there was a problem on this
occasion? No, no explanation. After one hour, we were just told you can go
through now. It was only subsequently when I wrote in that it was suggested to
me that perhaps the security person needed more training. But I really put it to
Gatwick customer service that I really had felt discriminated against. Lots and
lots of people were going through within that one hour. I was held back because
I had a guide dog. Initially, I was told that they had viewed CCTV and I was
pleased with that because that authenticated what I was saying. But the customer
service department felt that I had not been discriminated against. I think they
were also trying to blame the pandemic, saying they had new staff since post
pandemic and maybe more training was required and more experience. What more
would you like to see done as a result of your experience? I guess a bit more
than the offer of a bunch of flowers. The offer of a bunch of flowers is rather,
you know, very poor compensation, I feel, for the way I was treated. I would
really leave that up to Gatwick Airport to, you know, make me some form of
suitable compensation in recognition of the way I had been treated and to
actually recognise that I had been treated less favourably, in other words,
discriminated against on this occasion. Eleanor Burke, thank you very much
indeed. Well, listening to that has been Adam Jones. Adam is head of passenger
services at Gatwick. Adam, quite simply, if you could, why did this happen,
given that it seems to be accepted generally that Eleanor had done absolutely
everything she could have done and should have done to inform people she was
travelling with a guide dog? So firstly, I have to apologise profusely for Ms
Burke's experience here. As you said, she had done everything right. On an
unfortunate occasion, some of our security team didn't follow their training or
our processes, which caused the issue she had in the security area. We're taking
steps, obviously, having reviewed this incident, to make sure this doesn't
happen again. I mean, should people be administering security if they haven't
been trained properly and don't know the rules? We have a very large airport
security team here who are all trained to the standards set by the CAA, which
we're regularly audited on, and we train them for every eventuality, including
this. On this occasion, like I said, I have to apologise. We let Ms Burke down.
We refocused the individuals involved to make sure they know how to act next
time, and the wider security team will be briefed on what steps to take in a
certain situation, and if they're unsure, they can quickly summon a duty manager
who will make sure anyone such as Ms Burke gets through really quickly. This is
actually one of the questions I was going to ask you, because one is used to, I
mean, I go, as a blind person, go through security quite a lot, and you do have
this problem that it's a fairly chaotic situation for a start. The rules seem to
change from day to day. Do I have to take off a coat? Do I have to take off my
shoes? And I frequently find myself stuck on the other side of security with a
piece of my specialist equipment being sort of puzzled over, but not having the
chance to talk to anybody about it. I mean, how can somebody summon qualified
help when you get a problem like the one Eleanor had? So you should absolutely
be able to ask any member of our staff for help, and if you're not going to help
your needs from them, they should call the duty manager, who's always available
in the security area, to come and help. Obviously, if passengers are travelling
with special assistance support from our service provider, they can, of course,
also be on hand to assist you as well. I mean, I just wonder, is this really a
security issue? I mean, surely you're looking for far more important things when
carrying out a security check than someone with a guide dog. Of course, part of
the security requirement is to make sure no one crosses from the land side to
the air side part of the airport unless they're permitted to and are travelling.
So this involves also obviously checking that any animals with them are service
animals and can also go through security. As I said, that should have been a
seamless, easy process for Ms Burke. It wasn't on this occasion, and we are
taking steps, having reviewed the incident, to make sure it doesn't happen
again. So what lessons does Gatwick take from this incident? Well, as part of
our investigation, we have identified that across the 40 airlines you fly from
Gatwick, there are some slightly different processes in letting us know that a
passenger is travelling with an assistance dog. So our accessibility manager is
going to work with our airlines to try and get one common process that
everyone's aware of, everyone follows, and that will make it easier for our
staff then to ensure they're following the correct process and procedure. And
that's taking place right now. I'd like to pick up one thing with you. Eleanor
mentioned that, you know, the pandemic got mentioned. Aren't people getting
really rather fed up with the fact that the pandemic is cited every time there's
a bit of a problem? I mean, you know, the rules have relaxed now for over a
year. Isn't it time that in that sense, things are back to normal and people who
are doing the job know what they're doing? Yes, and that is absolutely not an
excuse in this situation. Our customer service team, I think, pointed out that
we'd hired 400 new airport security officers, so they're in the central search
area. We have trained them all appropriately, but maybe we just need to review
and make sure that everyone is fully aware of how to handle situations such as
this. But of course, you're right, this isn't a result of the COVID pandemic. So
just to be clear, one final point, Adam, for future travellers with guide dogs,
what do they actually need to have done in order to comply with the various
protocols that might be in place? So right now, they should follow the procedure
their individual airline sets down. So as Ms Burke did with Ryanair, follow
Ryanair's process, and that will make sure that we get notified that a
passenger's come in with an assistance dog. Whilst I know it failed on this
occasion, and we'll look to make sure that process can be improved, it works the
vast majority of the time, and so people just follow their normal process. So
you don't actually need, as Eleanor was told she did, to actually present any
documents as you go through, any paper documents? That's correct. Unfortunately,
as well as our security officers not following their training and process,
Ryanair's handling agent at the airport also gave Ms Burke some incorrect
information there. So Ms Burke being a regular traveller through Gatwick and
over to Ireland did exactly what she should do, and as I said, I apologise for
experience here, and we're going to work hard to make sure it doesn't happen
again. Adam Jones, and before that, Eleanor Burke, thank you very much. Well,
taking your guide dog on the train should hopefully be a rather simpler process
than taking to the air, but there are still plenty of things which can go wrong
when you're on the trains, and the travel assistance offered at stations doesn't
always go without a hitch. Well, now one train company, Avanti West Coast, has
just launched a dedicated communications channel to provide disabled passengers
with instant help during their journey, in what they're describing as a first
for the UK rail industry. Called Travel Companion, it will use the messaging at
WhatsApp to connect you to someone who can offer specialist support while
travelling. Well, Martin Byrne and Ricky West are both visually impaired, and
they've been recruited to advise on this service. Ricky, if I can come to you
first, what kind of situations do you visualise where this service can be used?
We're hoping it's going to be a layer of support prior to your journey, during
your journey, and after your journey. So, it could be your correct ticket,
knowing if you've got the right one. So, what you could do is get in contact
with us and ask, have I got the right ticket? Because we've partnered with Be My
Eyes, so an independent app that hopefully most people know about and use, that
connects through to the Avanti West Coast team. That would be myself and Martin,
and the social media team that have had accessibility training, and we can
identify that ticket for you. So, you're anticipating this is going to be used
mainly by people who are travelling on their own? It's for anyone. It's for any
accessible requirement can sort of come through and get help and support. So,
that's a prior to your journey. During your journey, people might need to
identify their seat. They may potentially have been on the journey a long time
and need to identify their luggage. If they need help and support from the train
manager or onboard crew, we can get in touch with them and get them to come to
the passenger, instead of them trying to having to find an onboard staff member.
So, if you're comparing it, for example, with the service that is offered at the
moment with assistance with getting on the train, the main thing you're
anticipating this is going to be useful for is actually during your journey?
Yes, during the journey. So, passenger assistance is there to help you onboard
with connections and moving around the station. Passenger assistance is a great
service and it's there to enrich the service to sort of add extra value onto
that. We will work hand in hand with those teams. And I think it gives that
peace of mind and encourages independent travel as well. I think it hopefully
builds the confidence that there is somebody there throughout the journey
because there may be an element of fear of people getting on the train, the
passenger assistance walking away and you're left on the train alone. So,
hopefully with this methodology and connections to ourselves, you can reach out
to us if that need is there. One point I would like to make to you, I mean,
WhatsApp is still a digital service, which requires the use of a smartphone.
Now, that still limits the number of people who can use it. Is there a non-
digital alternative to this? Now, at this point, I have to say there isn't. And
I will stress this is a trial and what we are willing to look at, and I've
already investigated the options around going to text messaging. It's
unfortunate, it's the sort of the in-house management to keep it real time is
the challenge for management of this. But it's not to say we won't going down
that route if we can get the technology in place moving forward. We understand
there's going to be people out there that will use text messages only and we are
looking hopefully long term to get a solution in place. But as we say for this
trial at the moment, it is only WhatsApp. Martin Byrne, Ricky West, thank you
both very much. And for those of you who are interested in trying out this
service, the WhatsApp number you will find on our website address at the end of
the programme. And it is true that however confident and competent a visually
impaired rail traveller you might be, things do go wrong on stations which are
potentially dangerous places. It's something Secker Hall knows only too well, as
his recent email reminded us. It's nearly three years ago that my partner, Mr
Cleveland Gervais, died at Eden Park station. He was registered blind and there
was no tactile paving on the platform he fell from. I'm contacting you to see if
you can help me find out what progress has there been on installing tactile
paving across the rail network. Well, Secker is referring to the roughened
material which has been fitted to some, but by no means all, platform edges in
order to give a warning that you're approaching a potential fall onto the
tracks. In the inquiry which followed Secker's partner's death, which we
reported on extensively on InTouch, it was established that the lack of such a
tactile warning was a contributory factor to his partner's death. Well, we and a
number of organisations representing blind people, such as the RNIB and Guide
Dogs, have been persistently drawing attention to the fact that Network Rail had
initially said that without more resources they couldn't complete this work
until 2029. But in the light of Mr Hall's request for more information to us,
we've been seeking confirmation from Network Rail and the Department for
Transport that reports of more government money being available could be
confirmed. Well, in a statement, Network Rail have told us, Our programme to
install tactile platforms continues, bolstered by £75 million which we were
given by government last year. The programme is making good progress now, with
cross-industry help from train operating companies, and it covers England, Wales
and Scotland at all stations where tactile platforms had not been part of
existing renewal plans. The funding runs until March 2025. Well, this sounds
like good news and is certainly being interpreted as such by the RNIB and Guide
Dogs. We are still trying to ascertain if funding continues until March 2025 can
be interpreted as work will be completed by 2025. But as we record this
programme, we've still not had that confirmation. Watch this space and meanwhile
listen out for this temporary safety solution which you'll hear at a number of
stations. Please be aware that some platforms at this station have no or only
partial tactile paving on the platform edge. You have been warned. Well, that's
it for today. Contacting us does make a difference. You can email InTouch at
bbc.co.uk, leave a voice message on 0161 836 1338 or go to our website bbc.co.uk
forward slash InTouch where you'll also find that WhatsApp number. From me,
Peter White, producer Beth Hemmings and studio manager Amy Brennan, goodbye.
Those contact details again. The phone number to ask a question or leave a
comment is 0161 836 1338 and the email address InTouch at bbc.co.uk. Inside
Health is next this evening, tackling back pain. Listeners have been contacting
the programme with their questions on how best to manage the pain and of course
live happier lives in the process. James Gallaher and his expert guests will be
handling those questions in a couple of minutes just after the news. Explore the
world of arts and culture on Front Row. The atmosphere changes, the hair starts
to stand up on the back of your neck. The biggest news and interviews. It was an
absolute dream of mine to perform on a stage. Alongside live discussions,
debates and the latest reviews. She's a series of contrasts which I thought were
quite fascinating. I loathed it. I can't recommend it enough because it's so
thoroughly entertaining. Join Samira Ahmed and me, Tom Sutcliffe for Front Row.
You are a national treasure. Live every Monday to Thursday evening on Radio 4 at
7.15 and you can listen to past episodes.