TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 On FM, on Longwave and on BBC Sounds, this is BBC Radio 4. Hello and welcome to
The World at One with me, Sarah Montagu. Boris Johnson weighs in on Rishi
Sunak's new deal for Northern Ireland. I'm going to find it very difficult to
vote for somebody like this myself because I believed that we should have done
something different. We must be clear about what is really going on here. This
is not about the UK taking back control. We'll try to establish whether his
intervention will make any difference. Also on the programme, tensions over
Russia's war in Ukraine have dominated the G20 talks in Delhi. It comes as
Russia says a group of Ukrainian combatants have crossed into the country. The
Kremlin are calling it a terrorist attack. Concerns over the quality of sex
education in schools here, we speak to students. I don't think any student feels
particularly comfortable talking about sex with a teacher. And Grimsby Town and
their unique chant reach the quarter-finals of the FA Cup. Six claps and fish,
yeah. It's a nice easy chant. You just clap to the beat and just shout fish as
loud as you can. The BBC News is read by Alan Smith. In the past hour, Boris
Johnson has warned he will find it very difficult to vote for Rishi Sunak's new
Brexit deal because, in his words, this is not about the UK taking back control.
Delivering a speech in central London, the former Prime Minister said there was
no point withdrawing from the EU unless things were done differently and he
would continue to campaign for what he thought of as Brexit. Our political
correspondent Ben Wright was listening. Boris Johnson has staged stum since
Rishi Sunak secured a new Brexit arrangement for Northern Ireland, a deal which
replaces the one Mr Johnson negotiated with the EU. The Windsor Framework
removes barriers on trade across the Irish Sea and gives politicians in store
Montevito over EU laws that apply in Northern Ireland. While the Democratic
Unionist Party and Tory Brexiteers scrutinised the agreement, Mr Johnson has now
given a verdict. Speaking at a conference in London, the former Prime Minister
said he would find it very difficult to vote for the deal, describing it as a
drag anchor on the UK's ability to divert from EU laws and standards. Mr Johnson
said he hoped the deal would work, but if it didn't, the government should have
the guts to deploy the Northern Ireland Protocol Bill, controversial legislation
he introduced but Rishi Sunak has pulled. The question now is whether a chunk of
Tory MPs follow Mr Johnson's lead. The former Health Secretary Matt Hancock has
accused the journalist who leaked WhatsApp messages he sent during the height of
the pandemic of a massive betrayal and breach of trust. Isabel Oakeshott has
defended her decision to release the details to the Daily Telegraph, arguing it
was in the overwhelming national interest. Here's our Chief Political
Correspondent Nick Erdely. The latest messages published by the Daily Telegraph
give an insight into how bitter the row over school closures in England became.
They show Mr Hancock in an aid discussing the then Education Secretary Gavin
Williamson fighting tooth and nail to keep schools open. Mr Hancock pledges a
rearguard action to reverse that policy and close them down. This came at a time
when government policy did change rapidly over the course of days, culminating
in a national lockdown. Schools were closed as the number of Covid cases rose.
But the bitter row is now over the publication of the correspondence. Ms
Oakeshott told the BBC that no journalist worth their salt would sit on the
messages. She insisted she had a responsibility to the public interest. But Mr
Hancock said there was no public interest because he'd provided them to the
public inquiry. He said that inquiry should be where they are assessed, not
through partial leaks in newspapers. A report due to be published within the
hour will set out whether the security services could have prevented the
Manchester Arena bombing. It's the final report from the long-running public
inquiry into the 22 deaths in May 2017. It'll examine the radicalisation of the
bomber, Salman Abedi, and what MI5 and counter-terrorism police knew about him.
The Russian President Vladimir Putin says a Ukrainian sabotage group has
knowingly fired at civilians in what he claims to be a terrorist attack in
southern Russia. Officials reported that the Bryansk region was hit by a
Ukrainian military drone and that a group had crossed the border and taken
hostages. Ukraine has dismissed the claims as a Russian provocation. Olga Ishina
reports. Information from Bryansk, the Russian region that's closest to Ukraine,
is patchy and is impossible to verify at present. Several Russian media outlets
have reported that full-scale fighting is ongoing between Russian forces and
what's described as a Ukrainian saboteur group, which it's claimed has
infiltrated the Bryansk region. State media says at least one person has been
killed as a result of a Ukrainian drone attack. The Kremlin says President Putin
is receiving regular updates. Ukraine's government has dismissed the reports as
a deliberate provocation. Russia's border regions have become volatile since
Moscow started its full-scale invasion of Ukraine. According to the British
Ministry of Defence, the Bryansk region has been used to launch Russian drone
attacks against Ukraine. The former deputy commissioner of the Metropolitan
Police has been referred to the police watchdog. After allegations, he spoke of
rape complaints as regretful sex. Sir Stephen House strongly denies making the
comments. He left the force last year after a spell as acting commissioner. Our
Home Affairs correspondent, June Kelly, reports. During a meeting in 2022,
Professor Betsy Stanko, a Home Office-appointed advisor on rape investigations,
said that Sir Stephen House described the bulk of allegations as regretful sex.
He's denied using these words. The current Met deputy commissioner, Dame Lynn
Owens, described the alleged remarks as wholly unacceptable and said they would
risk further undermining the confidence of victims to come forward. Sir Stephen
will step back from a review he was heading into productivity in policing. The
lawyer for the former England cricket captain, Michael Vaughan, has told a
hearing that racism allegations made by his team-mate, Azim Rafiq, are word
against word. Vaughan is alleged to have said, there's too many of you lot, when
referring to Rafiq and other Asian players at Yorkshire Cricket Club. The
England and Wales Cricket Board has been setting out cases against Vaughan and a
number of other former players. Our sports reporter, Matt Graveling, is at the
hearing. Michael Vaughan categorically denies the accusation and his lawyer said
he couldn't believe the claim had been made against him. His lawyer added, this
happened before a T20 match on the 22nd of June 2009 and given the passage of
time, Mr Vaughan can't remember what he said but he's adamant he didn't use
those words. One of the other players who claim to have heard the comments is
England bowler, Adil Rashid. He is currently on tour with England in Bangladesh
but has dialled into the hearing via video link. He said he heard the comments
but he was not offended. He does not think Michael Vaughan is a racist. He said
it was bad humour. That was our sports reporter, Matt Graveling. Thank you very
much, Alan. Now until today, Rishi Sunak could not have wished for a better
response to his new deal for Northern Ireland, the so-called Windsor Framework.
The arch-Brexiteers in his government appear to have been won over, the small
group of those on his back benches have been silent. The DUP has welcomed
progress but is yet to cast its judgement. And then, within the past hour, Boris
Johnson finally gave his verdict and said he would find it hard to support the
deal. Who votes for the people who decide how your pet dog or cat can get to
Northern Ireland and back? Who votes for the people who make laws about Easter
eggs or cakes or boats or any other manufactured goods? Who votes for the people
who set VAT rates on sanitary wear in Northern Ireland? No-one in England or
Scotland or Wales and no-one in Northern Ireland. And I think there was a
reason, as I say, the public voted us an 80-seat majority in 2019. And that was
because they instinctively knew that we had to fix this. And that's why we had
the bill. And look, get to the punchline. I'm going to find it very difficult to
vote for something like this myself because I believed that we should have done
something different, no matter how much plaster came off the ceiling in
Brussels. And I hope that it will work. And I also hope that if it doesn't work,
we will have the guts to deploy that bill again. Because I have no doubt at all
that that was what brought the EU to negotiate seriously. And in the meantime, I
will continue to campaign for what I thought of and what I think of as Brexit.
Well, that was the Prime Minister just a short time ago. Ben Wright, our
political correspondent, former Prime Minister, of course, joins us from
Westminster. Ben Wright. And in a way, what's striking about, well, there are a
number of things that are striking about that, not just his verdict, but also
that he will continue to campaign. Yeah, he wants to remain on the stage. He
sounded grouchy and disappointed when talking about the new deal that Rishi
Sunak has agreed with the European Union that, of course, replaces the original
Northern Ireland protocol that he hammered out with the European Union, a deal
which he says clearly was a failure. And he said, I take some responsibility for
that. We're in, as you said, Sarah, a bit of a hiatus at the moment while the
Democratic Unionist Party and Tory Brexiteers digest the deal and work out
whether they're going to support it in Parliament. So Boris Johnson steps into
that gap and several things stood out. First, he clearly has mixed feelings
about this new agreement. There were no congratulations for the new prime
minister, no rhetorical slap on the back. Instead, Boris Johnson said it would
be a drag anchor on the UK's ability to divert from EU laws and standards. In
his view, it defeated one of the points of Brexit. And he said he'll find it
very difficult to support this in the House of Commons. Second, as you just
heard, he thinks that the government has made a massive mistake in ditching the
Northern Ireland protocol bill, that really controversial piece of legislation
that would have given the UK government unilateral powers to ditch the protocol,
risking, though, perhaps a trade war with the EU in the process. He thinks that
should still be somewhere on the table. Thirdly, and I thought most revealing,
he also said he was conscious of where the political momentum is at the moment.
He said he understands why people are fatigued and why so many people are minded
to accept the new compromise. So perhaps he's also keeping his options open a
bit. OK, well, stay there, Ben, because I want to bring in our Northern Ireland
political editor, Enda McLafferty, who is in Belfast. Now, Enda, there's
obviously a question of who is going to be affected by this. Where do you think
the DUP are at the moment? Because one of the measures of the success of this
deal is whether the DUP are won over enough to go back into the Northern Ireland
Assembly. What's their thinking at the moment and will this affect that? Well, I
think the party right now is locked in some very difficult internal
conversations about what the next step should be, because I think there's a
sense within the party that this is going to happen regardless of the position
that they take, that the government's going to press ahead with this new
agreement and put it into legislation. So the DUP has a big call to make because
the party knows that if it doesn't now act, if it doesn't now move to go back
into storm it once more and restore the institutions, that this moment, in a
sense, will have passed and there'll be no opportunity in the future because
there'll be no more negotiation for them to take that path back to power sharing
once more. And there is an interesting split within the party because we do know
that their MLAs, for instance, in Belfast and Northern Ireland are quite keen
for that to happen. They're currently working on a reduced salary because there
is no power sharing in Northern Ireland, while their MPs sometimes take a more
hard line when it comes to what they want to see out of this deal and they're
very much pushing the leader to hold out for more concessions. But I think Boris
Johnson's intervention today will not cut much ice with many of those within the
DUP because they look at Boris Johnson as the man who created the protocol, the
man, in a sense, who betrayed them initially and then the man who wasn't able to
fix the mess that he created. Well, Ben, will it cut much ice with Conservative
backbenchers? One Tory Brexiteer told me a few minutes ago that he thought Mr
Johnson's comments would focus minds and make people think, that there was a
sort of general sense of euphoria and acceptance around the Tory party in
Parliament this week, that this was certainly progress. The person I spoke to
thought that this could just focus minds a bit more. I mean, they're currently,
the European Research Group anyway, that group of backbench Tory Eurosceptics,
have appointed a team of lawyers to go through the fine detail of this and
they'll come up with their own judgement within the next couple of weeks that
will shape, I think, the view of that chunk of Tory MPs. But look at the
parliamentary arithmetic. I think if the DUP decide that this deal is good
enough for them, then I think that will move a lot of Conservative opinion
behind it. Labour has said they'll back it in Parliament and I think broadly the
majority of Tory MPs, if it comes to it, will support it. So I don't think Boris
Johnson's intervention makes any difference in terms of this potentially
clearing the parliamentary hurdle that it needs to at some point in the near
future. Ben Wright and Enda McLafferty, thank you both very much. The foreign
ministers of the world's most powerful countries meeting at the G20 in Delhi
have failed to produce a jointly agreed statement. It had been hoped that it
could be a chance for some diplomacy over the Ukraine war. The US Secretary of
State, Antony Blinken, did meet Russia's Foreign Minister, Sergei Lavrov, but
we've been told they only spoke for less than 10 minutes on the margins of the
meetings and all we know of the conversation is that Mr Blinken stressed that
Washington would continue to support Ukraine for as long as it takes. As they
were meeting, the situation on the ground was sounding more dangerous. Russia
has accused Ukrainian saboteurs of crossing the border into Russian territory
and taking hostages. Ukraine says that's not true, that it's a deliberate
provocation on the part of Russia or what's known as a red flag operation. Now,
it may be even more complicated than that. This is the video that was posted on
Telegram. Well, in that video, you can hear there a heavily armed man saying
he's from the Russian Volunteer Corps. That's a Russian opposition group who are
operating in Ukraine against President Putin. He says they've crossed the
Russian border, they don't fight civilians or kill unarmed people and he says
the time has come for ordinary Russians to realise that they're not slaves and
they should rise up and fight. Now, there have been reports that this event has
prompted President Putin to call for an emergency meeting of Russia's Security
Council. Vitaly Shevchenko is Russia editor at BBC Monitoring. And Vitaly, I
mean, there is clearly still a lot of confusion around exactly what's going on.
What do you understand the situation to be? What happened in Russia's Bryansk
region is both alarming and unusual. Nothing like this has happened before. It
all started this morning when pro-war, pro-Kremlin commentators and media in
Russia started claiming that a group of people they called Ukrainian saboteurs,
numbering between 40 and 50, had crossed from Ukraine into Russia. And these
reports, unsubstantiated, I have to say, they painted a truly horrific picture
of these Ukrainians taking hostages, shooting at cars, school buses. But later
this narrative mutated towards a slightly different picture, which was later
presented by President Putin, among other officials. He said that a car carrying
civilians had been attacked by people who described Ukrainian neo-Nazis and
terrorists. Now, again, we have no confirmation about as to who these people
were or what they did there. At this moment in time, reports from Bryansk region
suggest that they had gone back to Ukraine. So the big question now is what
Russia is going to do about it. The fact that President Putin mentioned this at
a meeting, at a video link meeting with teachers, suggests that he's taking an
interest and he's chairing a meeting of Russian security officials tomorrow. So
it would be really interesting and important to see what response Russia takes,
if any, to what happened in Bryansk today. OK, Vitaly Shevchenko, thank you very
much. Let's turn now to Sir Tony Brenton, former UK ambassador to Moscow. Good
afternoon, Sir Tony. While we're hearing these conflicting reports of what was
happening on the border with Russia, we know that there is this first meeting,
as we understand it, between the US Secretary of State and his Russian
counterpart, which, I mean, on the face of it, I suppose is a good thing, but it
doesn't sound as though there was anything positive to come away from this.
Well, indeed. I mean, they were probably stuck together in rather a small room
with half a dozen other foreign ministers. They found themselves standing side
by side. Neither of them could say nothing in those circumstances, particularly
since Lavrov speaks fluent English. So Biden delivered some of his points to
make, like Russia should not be withdrawing from strategic arms reductions talks
and those sorts of things. I don't think any real communication took place. And
it just underlines the fact of how far apart they are and how difficult that
makes meetings like the one they were all at, which was the G20 foreign
ministers, to reach any sensible conclusions on what to say about the conflict.
Right. And on that, the G20 obviously tries to agree some form of communique,
but because of the opposition of both Russia and China, they can't. How
significant? I mean, is that significant? Is it inevitable? And how much of a
worry is it? Well, it's a worry in the sense that the G20 can't even produce
bland set of words about this thing. And that underlines how deep the
disagreement is. But we knew that already. I don't know, actually, whether they
have failed to produce communique or whether something is still under
negotiation, because there are some quite important issues for them to talk
about. They need to talk about resuming the authorization for Ukrainian grain
exports to the outer world. And that could be quite a useful thing for them to
do. And it will be interesting also to see what reaction, if any, they can
produce to the Chinese peace proposals of a few days ago. But on the central
issues of the conflict, obviously, they can't produce any agreement. The G20
finance ministers last week didn't. The G20 leaders back in Bali, back in
October last year, didn't. And we have upcoming G20 leaders this year in
September, again in New Delhi. And it will be interesting to see how much the
conflict has moved by then. And if it has moved, whether that opens up some
scope for them to say something useful. OK, I mean, given what's going on on the
ground at the moment, is there any, I mean, are we not in a situation militarily
where there can be no diplomacy? Well, yes, in the sense that if either side
believes firmly they're going to win without diplomacy, then they're obviously
not going to talk. And at the moment, the Ukrainians and possibly the Russians,
but certainly the Ukrainians, firmly believe that they have the initiative and
they're going to win. So the moment the thing is stuck, the Russians are
obviously stuck outside the city that nobody's ever heard of before, Bahmut,
where they've been trying to take for six months and still haven't succeeded.
The big question is when we get into the spring and campaigning possibilities
improve, whether at that point the Ukrainians can make significant advances with
all the splendid new equipment that we've provided them with, or they also are
stuck. So actually, interestingly, by the summer, either they will have made
significant progress, in which case we're in a new situation and there may be
scope to talk then, with the Russians willing to accept less in any outcome, or
they haven't and both sides are stuck. And at that point, again, there's
pressure on both sides to begin to talk about how they can at least achieve a
ceasefire. OK, but given even where we are at the moment and the position of
China shifting, according to the United States, very much towards Russia, how
ominous does that sound to you? Well, first of all, I have to say it sounds
implausible. The Chinese are very carefully sat on the fence. And whatever the
Americans may be saying, I mean, the Americans are in a state of slight hysteria
about China at the moment because of the balloon and all of that. Whatever the
Americans may be saying, I don't see any real pressure on the Chinese to shift
from that not comfortable, but the least awkward place they can be, which is
sitting on the fence. If they did shift, that would be significant. And there
are rumors of the Americans trying to line up the West on sanctions against
China in those circumstances. That would really quite substantially deepen what
is already quite a deep split between China and the West and thereby add
significantly to the geopolitical implications of the Ukrainian war. But I'm not
convinced that we're there yet. Sir Tony Brenton, thank you very much. Tomorrow,
we'll be hearing from another part of the world living with Russian troops on
its border. Katie Williamson will be in Moldova. We're here in the tiny Moldovan
enclave of Molovata, Noa, squeezed between the River Dniester and the pro-
Russian breakaway region of Transnistria. 30 years ago, Moldovan forces fought
pro-Russian separatists here for control of the territory. Now, with Moscow
warning that Transnistria could be dragged into its war in Ukraine, fears of a
fresh conflict here are growing. We'll hear more in our report from Molovata,
Noa in tomorrow's programme. To get in touch on social media, hashtag BBC WATO,
email address worldatone at bbc.co.uk. Now then, it is three years since all
schools have had to, by law, teach relationship and sex education. There's
currently a review of how it's going and research by the Sex Education Forum, an
independent campaigning charity, says that only 40% of young people rated their
lessons as good or very good. And they found that students felt they didn't
learn enough about pornography or LGBTQ plus issues, or about healthy
relationships. Some research from America last year found that 58% of female
college students had been choked during sex. The study found that while many
women did enjoy choking, others did it largely to please their sexual partner.
We'll hear more on that in a moment, but first Lucy Emerson is chief executive
of the Sex Education Forum, and she told me what students had said to them.
They're telling us, unfortunately, that the quality isn't there, it's not
consistent. There are topics that were made mandatory, like pornography and
healthy relationships, and these topics are often being missed altogether. So
the promise that was made in legislation hasn't followed through into all
classrooms. And the teacher training to provide that quality of relationships in
sex education hasn't materialised either. Right, and something like pornography,
I mean, it's so prevalent nowadays, it seems bizarre that it's being missed.
That's right, and it is part of the mandatory topics that need to be covered in
secondary education. So at the Sex Education Forum, we've decided to ask young
people directly, and we're calling on the government to do the same, to measure
the rollout of their own legislation. So from what you're saying, the framework
is OK, or at least that's the feeling, it's just not being applied well enough
in schools. That's right, and often the topics which are perhaps more
challenging to teach are the ones being neglected more, reflecting a lack of
confidence amongst teachers because they haven't had the training. Because of
the online world and what's available, do you think this generation are more in
need of sex education, and perhaps detailed sex education, than any previous
generation? Without a doubt, the current complexities of life, the online
environment, are posing acute challenges to children and young people. We're
seeing that exposure start at primary school. We're also aware of issues like
child sexual abuse that start with young children. You know, we can't afford to
wait. Young people have said actually for decades that their relationships in
sex education is left too late. What's the kind of thing that you've heard about
from young people that you think, look, this is what schools need to engage with
to explain? Young people are so wise. They're telling us that they want
opportunities to have those safe discussions with their peers, to be able to ask
questions, sometimes anonymously. They want it to be LGBT inclusive. They want
to cover things about cultural and faith perspectives. They want to look at the
real life scenarios, not just learn about facts to do with a topic. They've also
said sometimes they find themselves in lessons where a video is put on. That's
not what they want. They want a two-way conversation. Adults are going to have
to overcome their embarrassment to do that. And that's where the training need
comes in, so that we've got educators feeling that they can handle this. Lucy
Emerson, Chief Executive of the Sex Education Forum. I've been speaking to a
group of 16 to 17 year olds about their views on how they've been taught about
relationships and sex education. They were Anya, Tegan, Ben and first Alex. I
think it's lacking. We have like one, one maybe a year, one lesson on sex
education a year. And especially with COVID, we didn't get it then either. And
with regards to normal relationships, we have PSHCE once a fortnight. But I
think when it comes to relationships, we might have one or two lessons a year on
it. This is Ben. And I think that it's just we're taught about it much more
safely and how we're supposed to go about it without the intention of like
having a good time, but more being like tailored to how it's supposed to be safe
and things like that, rather than it's so it almost seems a bit like dangerous
and off-putting, I think, in a way. Tegan, what do you think of the sort of
lessons you've had? I think coming all the way through high school, it was once
a year. And then in year 11, we had like a little mini topic. It was very
scientific, like we didn't really do anything other than contraception and
prevention of diseases and stuff. Obviously, we get taught about like
heterosexual relationships and like the dangers of having sex when you're not
ready to have a baby and stuff like that. But it's not taught like that gay
relationships and stuff like that and like LGBT relationships and how that can
affect people, because it's just teachers always say how they want that to be
normalized throughout school, but then we don't get taught about them. Anya,
what's your experience been? I mean, we definitely picked up on all the topics
that need to be covered to do with safety and everything, as Ben said. But yeah,
they definitely don't teach you about how it can be enjoyed or like that even
people are going to go and do things like that and they need to teach you how to
do it safely rather than putting you off. Consent? Do you get taught about
consent? Yeah, I mean, we watched a tea video. That's actually standard in
schools, I think, isn't it, watching the tea video about consent? I don't think
we really go over like the manipulation that can happen as well. Like it's
obviously a no means no and stuff like that, but it's not as talked about that
if you're being manipulated to do something you don't want to do and you end up
saying yes, that's still not a yes. Have they ever talked about pornography?
Because presumably that's something every teenager comes across. No, I've never
come across anything about that at school at all. We've had, I think, one
lecture. It was about like being safe when, like if you ever want to watch
pornography or anything like that, it's like finding links or things like that
and it's like more online safety. It's not body image or anything like that. I
mean, we've done body image in PSHE lessons. But yeah, I think that whole topic
is not very well touched upon. And you mentioned body image because it's linked
to the expectations that people might have if they're watching pornography and
learning stuff from pornography. Yeah, well, I think it does set a very
unrealistic standard for teenagers, especially people who aren't in sexual
relationships, people who don't have any experience. It's setting an unrealistic
standard for things like that. Can I ask you all, there's something else that's
thrown up, which is, and in fact, it was reflected in the television programme
Euphoria, which is the idea of choking in sex. And there are surveys,
particularly in the United States, which show that a lot of women have found
that their sexual partner automatically starts to choke them. Is that something
you guys have heard of, have come across or been aware of? I mean, I've heard of
it, but I think pornography just sets like, it seems to be quite brutal, very
unrealistic. Tegan, what about you? I think because it's so commonly seen on
them kind of websites that people just automatically assume that's what everyone
is into, when it should be a conversation more like, because everyone likes
different things. And probably a lot of people aren't a big fan of the choking.
Have you heard of people who've heard that? Yeah, I think it's just like, social
media is a big thing. And a lot of people like to overshare certain things in
attempts to normalise things that aren't often normalised. It seems like it's a
violent act. It's not something that's supposed to happen in a loving act. And
it just all seems blown completely out of proportion by small acts like that,
which I think are the main things that are focused on. And rather than what
you'd normally expect, it's the smaller aspects that are more violence inciting
and are more potentially dangerous that I think wrongly get the main focus.
Okay, so that's interesting. Ben, when you talked about this with your friends,
it's not something that people talk about or you would think is being done? No,
not in my experience whatsoever. I don't think anyone expects it to happen. I
think that's awful if you do, personally. And has that ever come up in
conversations at school about PSHEE or in sex education? No, when sex is spoken
about, it's not spoken about in that way. It's spoken about in what you can do
to prevent pregnancy and STDs. It's not like what might happen if you didn't
speak to people on social media. You'd never know that until it happened to you
because of schools just not touching on it. Do you all feel well informed? I
mean, whether it's from school or social media or television programmes, do you
feel sort of well informed? I think your friends definitely inform you a lot
more than you'd get from teachers. And I think obviously you can talk to your
family about it as well. But I think in general, it's more, it's not something
that school teaches you in terms of what to do and how to. And it's never going
to be something you think, do you think every generation will need to rely on
their friends? But is that in one sense, that's obvious. It's just whether there
are gaps and whether the school could do more. I mean, to be honest, I'm not
sure what more they can do because it's so difficult to successfully teach in
that situation without coming across as too informal and too almost weird,
because I find that really strange to have a conversation with a teacher about
those sorts of actions. I don't know, again, if that's something that can be
changed, but I don't think any student feels particularly comfortable talking
about sex with a teacher. No, I can imagine not. Anya, what about you? What are
your thoughts on sort of what you know and whether there's more you should be
taught by school? Well, I think school definitely informs you about, well,
obviously about how to be safe. I don't think it necessarily prepares you for
being in a sexual relationship. It kind of, it's scary in a way. Like if, I
mean, if you're not being told anything about what it's actually like, you're
just being told the dangers, it definitely creates a specific image on what sex
is like. And can I ask you all, have you ever been in a situation where you have
felt unsafe or threatened? I mean, I'm talking in a sexual way, either in a
public place or in a private situation. Like if you're in a group, a big group
of people, and there's just, like, there's been times where there'll be someone
who just, like, who touches you in a place you don't want to be touched, or just
makes an inappropriate comment, or like tries to, tries to like insinuate
something that you just didn't really want to happen. And that's very
normalised. Like, if I was to tell some of my friends that that happened, it'd
just be like, oh, that's annoying. And then we'd all move on because it just
happens. So literally somebody will, I mean, it's physical abuse. Yeah, and it's
just, because it's not, I don't want to say the word, but it's not like as bad
as it could be. It's quite normalised. That was Anya, Tegan, Ben and Alex
talking to me this morning. Now then, there's more fascinating insight in The
Telegraph today from Matt Hancock's WhatsApp messages from when he was Health
Secretary during the pandemic. It provides an insight into what was happening in
government and how decisions were made. The messages were given to the paper by
the journalist Isabel Oakeshott. She was given them when she worked with Matt
Hancock on his pandemic diaries and had to sign a non-disclosure agreement at
the time. So Max Hastings is a historian and author, but also former editor of
The Telegraph. So Max, good afternoon. Good afternoon. And can I start asking
you, given your experience in that role, because this is, I mean, from a
journalist's point of view, absolutely amazing to see, to receive this stuff, to
see it and then to be able to publish it. If you were editor of The Telegraph,
would you have had any queasiness about how she managed to get hold of these
messages? None at all. Matt Hancock started this by writing a self-justificatory
memoir, his diaries of COVID, which obviously intended to rehabilitate him. And
he obviously made the wrong choice in picking Isabel as his collaborator on this
book. And the morality of her choosing to break the agreement, that's between
her and her conscience. But as an editor, I wouldn't have hesitated for a
moment. It's a journalistic godsend, and I think most of the country will feel
it served Matt Hancock right. OK, but it's very interesting from a journalist's
point of view, because if she's approached to write them and she thinks, well,
this would be an amazing experience, and then she sees it and thinks it would be
absolutely overwhelmingly in the public interest, as she said, then surely at
that point, then you know you're going to break the non-disclosure agreement.
You only, it is not the problem of the editor to decide about her relationship
with the non-disclosure agreement. You only get it from ethical difficulties if
it's a breach of the Official Secrets Act or if you're breaking the law of the
land. This was not breaking the law of the land. All it was doing was breaking
Matt Hancock's competence. And I don't think many people will feel that that was
a very wicked thing to do. OK, so even on individual ethical grounds. One thing
I think does bear saying, you know, things have changed. It's almost impossible
now to keep things confidential. As a historian, one's terribly conscious that
governments and ministers throughout the ages, lots of them, have done things, I
won't say as bad as Matt Hancock, but arguably possibly worse. But they haven't
been found out because there wasn't this opportunity for disclosure, which now
emails open up to absolutely everybody. So I don't think we should think that
this government, it wasn't a very good government that Matt Hancock was part of,
but it wasn't uniquely awful. And I don't think he was a uniquely awful
minister. What is unique these days is you can't keep secrets anymore. That may
be a good thing. It may be a bad thing, but that's the world we're living in.
OK, because that is fascinating, because what you see, and particularly in
today's, we're seeing messages from, what, nearly a year into the pandemic, when
there's still sort of clearly a huge amount of confusion and argument about what
we knew quite a lot by then as to how, what decisions should be taken. Which
would sort of makes one, I suppose, will make people think, is this good
government? When you look at that, you would say, well, it may or may not be,
but it's no different from previous governments. Well, you look back on the Suez
crisis, 1956, when the British government lied again and again and again.
Ministers lied to Parliament. That was some of the worst decisions made in post-
war British history. But they didn't get caught out because the smoking gun, the
evidence, wasn't there for years. And that's what's changed. The person, if I
was going to be frightened of anybody this morning, it would be for Boris
Johnson, because he is going to produce a memoir which is designed to produce
his version of what happened on his watch. And an awful lot of people out there
are not going to agree with it. And I suspect there's going to be an enormous
amount of evidence to prove that some of the stuff that Boris Johnson did was,
shall we say, a distance from the truth and a distance from good government. So
I think Boris Johnson's memoirs are going to get the same sort of treatment from
all sorts of people that Matt Hancock's attempt to rehabilitate himself has had
now. So, Max Hastings, thank you so much. Now, for the first time since the
1930s, Grimsby Town is in the FA Cup quarterfinals. Against all the odds, they
beat Southampton last night 2-1. Here's their boss, Paul Hurst, on Five Live.
The sentence that I can't quite get around is Grimsby Town in the quarterfinals
of the FA Cup. That sounds a little bit ridiculous. Sounds good, doesn't it?
Sounds good. It does, but it sounds a little bit ridiculous. It sounds a bit
like I'm, or either myself or someone's playing football manager on the computer
or whatever. Grimsby supporters are known for their chant, it's the word fish,
and for bringing their mascot, an inflatable fish called Harry Haddock, to
matches. Christine Green chairs the Mariners Trust, who are the supporters of
Grimsby Town FC, and Steve Besant is a Lib Dem councillor and mayor of North
East Lincolnshire. When I spoke to both, I asked Christine how she was feeling
after last night. Incredibly tired. I've had about an hour's sleep, came home
last night. Just, there's no words to describe it. We went through a playoff
campaign last year that we said at the time was words couldn't match what had
happened. And we've done it again, we've done it away at a Premier League team
to get into the quarterfinal of the FA Cup that we've not done since 1939. So,
it's just, I don't very often struggle to be able to speak. You know, both my
children went and my son was stood crying at the end because the enormity of
what was going on in front of us was playing out. I was wondering, you have a
slightly croaky voice, but I don't know if that's normal. No, it's not. No, that
is very much through 90 odd minutes of singing and chanting, yeah. Councillor
Steve Besant, for Grimsby, how big a piece of news is this? It means everything
for the town. What I loved about last night was seeing Laurie McMenamy on the
TV, former Grimsby Town manager, former Southampton manager. I don't think he
knew who to support, but I hope he was cheering for Grimsby throughout the game.
It was absolutely brilliant. I mean, Christine, the last time, you mentioned the
last time Grimsby got to the quarterfinals, they did actually, back in the 30s,
get through to the semifinals, didn't they? Yeah, in the 30s we got through to
the semifinals twice, 36 and 39. I run a sporting memories group. We've got one
gentleman that is potentially just about old enough to remember the 39 season.
So you're creating memories that might not happen for another 84 years. Well, I
wanted to ask you that, Steve. What does it mean for the town, though? The town
is fanatical footballers. It wants to see something really happening. And it's
happening now. And it's absolutely stunning for this town. It's bringing back
past memories of the fishing industry, because we all know, unfortunately, the
fishing industry is in decline now. But the council and everybody need to be
working together to make this a better place. And football can drive it. It can
do. It can bring in sponsorship. It can bring in big money. People will start,
hopefully, investing in the town because of this. To be honest, when the
football club does well, everything else does well. Well, if there wasn't
pressure on the next match before, Christine, there certainly is now. Facing
Brighton, if there are people who want to support Grimsby, what should they be
chanting? What should they be singing? Sing When We're Fishing. There's a chant
that goes along with the drum, literally just fish, a nice, easy chant. So
they're the two sort of fish history related chants that go along at away games.
But just to add to what Steve said in terms of prosperity for the town, what our
Cup One has allowed the football club and the town to do is also shift focus
onto the future and actually show that Grimsby is not this finished town. It's
far from. It's a real battle of the seaside towns, first from Southampton and
now to Brighton. Now, Christine, I know we're a bit worried about your voice,
but I've got a request. Can you sing us? Maybe Steve can help. Help. Can you
sing us? Teach us the chant that we should be doing. Don't get me singing. I've
got the world's worst singing voice ever. I'll make it rain a will do if I start
singing. OK, I'm going to do something. Let's listen to the chant. Right,
Christine, Steve, I'm not going to ask you to sing, but can you help us with
that clapping and the chant? How does it go? It's just six claps and fish. Yeah.
You just clap to the beat and just shout fish as loud as you can. Fish,
Christine Green and Councillor Steve Besant there on Grimsby Town success. Look,
that's it from us. Just a reminder, as usual, PM's at five. I'm Sarah Montagu
and that is the world at one forty five. Studio Direction was by Jack Grazemark
and the editor was Jonathan Harvey. Now on Radio 4, we follow some of Britain's
biggest birds of prey on their epic autumn migration. Emily Knight presents
Flight of the Ospreys. Britain's ospreys are heading south. Back at the end of
summer, they began their 5000 kilometre migration from as far north as the
Cairngorms all the way to West Africa, where they spend the winter. But many
won't make it and even more won't make it back again next spring. A team of
conservationists is following them to discover the dangers they face along the
way and to ask what we could be doing to make their journey a little easier.
They're following the ospreys and we're following them. Biologist and adventurer
Sasha Dench is at the helm. It was just exciting to have a chance to follow the
journey of the ospreys, meet a few more people along the way in countries along
the flyway. It's mid-August and both ospreys and humans have navigated south
through the UK, across the Channel and down the length of France. And they've
hit their next challenge, the towering peaks of the Pyrenees. At that point, we
had a choice to make. So the ospreys also have a choice to make if they've got
to that point. They can choose to pass the Pyrenees either by going out to sea
and across the water. And many of them go through a main estuary known as
Ordebai and others head up straight into the mountains. And so which did you
choose? We chose both. First stop, the western route. The birds fly right out to
sea over the Bay of Biscay, then head south to find land again in northern
Spain, at an estuary called Ordebai. But on the drive over, the team hit
problems. The fan belt suddenly started squealing like mad, which we'd guess was
either something to do with the water pump or the alternator. We had then found
out very quickly that we had broken down at the worst possible time of year for
this region because everybody is on holiday. It's a Basque regional festival. So
we spent eight hours on the side of the motorway. Once we eventually got towed,
we were told that there would be no one available to even look at the vehicle
for another two weeks. And so, yeah, there was definitely a low in team morale.
But it definitely helps having osprey stuff and our route printed on the side of
the vehicle. The tow truck driver who was originally saying to us that nobody
will look at this for another two weeks, started asking us about the expedition.
And next thing he was like, OK, let me have a look. And he diagnosed it within
about five minutes and then said, there's a spare parts place down the road. I'm
pretty sure we'll have the part you need. Back on track and only a little behind
schedule, the team arrive at Ordebai. So I'm looking out now on a vast feed bed
where we've got egrets, gadwall, various different ducks. We've got black winged
stilts. And you can see from the air how it acts as a really natural funnel for
anything coming from the north. We're in the middle of the Ordebai Biosphere
Reserve, which is a really, really fantastic place. It's in the Basque Country
and it's a really important place for migratory birds and for the osprey, of
course. Rowan Hardman is one of the educators at Ordebai Bird Centre. For me,
it's magical. It has something special in all the seasons of the year.
Sometimes, for example, like in winter, it's full of widgons that have come from
the north. Maybe there'll be 400 widgons there and they make like an orchestra
with their amazing whistling. And you always have all the changing colours, the
different light. It's like a fantastic theatre. Back in 2017, Rowan was involved
in a groundbreaking reintroduction project here, bringing 12 tiny osprey chicks
from Scotland and raising them here on the reserve. I was looking after the
young ospreys when they were brought from Scotland. That was a whole, what would
I say, like a bit of a roller coaster in a way, because you feel so close to
them and responsible for them. Just watching them and feeding them every day and
watching their behaviour, watching them change from babies, really babies, at
the bottom of their cages. Then slowly, as they got older, watching them begin
to go on to their perches. And then finally, they started wanting to get out,
exercising their muscles. And then the final day, when you release them, you
spend the whole day there waiting for them to fly. And that terrible, oh my God,
are they going to be OK? Obviously, because there are roads nearby, there are
big trees nearby. So it's like when your baby takes the first steps, it's that
kind of feeling for a whole day. You're just waiting for them. And then they fly
and they are here in their independent stage. And then, you know, you wait for
them to come back. Some of them come back, but a lot of them don't. Like all
reintroduction projects, the real test comes long after the babies have flown
the nest. The question is whether any of them make it back again to breed. One
male, called Roy, has been coming back every year, but last year, for the very
first time, he was accompanied by a mate, a female called Landa. The celebrity
couple Roy and Landa became the first ospreys to breed in the Basque Country for
hundreds of years. Three chicks emerged. One of them was Albino, a pure white
osprey chick. Eduardo Onomuno, a biologist working at Udaibai, remembers the
excitement. We put a camera close to the nest and it was something incredible.
It was more or less the Covid season, so I think people were at home, confined,
and to have a camera in the nature with a couple of ospreys, with chicks, it was
like a big brother. Yeah, but with ospreys. So people were incredible. More than
one million visits we had in our YouTube channel. It was, wow, incredible,
incredibly incredible. From a local level to a global level, you know, it had
massive impact. When the whole process was happening, when the birds were
incubating the eggs, etc. I know that in the local bar, for example, they didn't
put the football on anymore. They followed the ospreys Roy and Landa. I mean,
this is amazing. You know, they really are the stars. The three chicks, watched
by the nation, weren't to survive. They had some extreme rainy weather right in
the middle of the breeding season, which basically got to all three birds and
all three of them died, which was really sad, but it is how nature works. OK, so
people were sad, but that's nature and that happens. And we all had hope, you
know, this year Roy is going to come back and Landa is going to come back and
they can try again and it will be OK. Roy and Landa didn't come back, not to
Udabai, not this year. I think one of them is over in the Muradawks in France
and another one has hooked up and has built a new nest about an hour away from
here. Basically all part of bringing a population back to the region. The team
head back out to the high Pyrenees, to the other place the birds might try to
cross. A mountain pass called Organbirechka. It was quite a hike up a hill for
me with one of my legs still in metal. But I managed to work my way up that, be
at the top of the hill and meet up with about 30 to 40 volunteers that sit on
the top of this mountain in the middle of a pass. So there are much higher
mountains all around you as far as you can see. And the day we got there, they
had only seen eight ospreys so far this year. And we saw two in the short time
we were there. So that was a pretty exciting moment. We spoke to a guy called
Serge who has been part of the research programme there for 42 years and it's
only been going for 44 years. We asked him, were there any unique
characteristics about ospreys on migration? The osprey can also migrate during
the night. The only other raptor that can do that is the Montague's harrier.
Others must stop at night time. And you can imagine the osprey is a strong flyer
because it has to be able to land in water, grab a large fish and then be able
to get airborne again from that position. So it's obviously strong, but the fact
that it also uses that ability on migration to get through these narrow
challenging passes was also really interesting. When it's windy, he rises using
a thermal, but then turns back. The wind would blow him right off course, so he
continues to soar, biding his time until he judges that it's just the right
moment to start flying with his strong wing beats. He keeps going until he can
start rising again. It can take a long time and means he has to do a great deal
of flying to cover the required distance. While the team is on the road, they're
also keeping up with three named and tagged ospreys from the Tweed Valley in
Scotland. Three brothers, Kirk, Glenn and Tweed, all flew the nest on the 25th
of August, although they won't head south together. Newly-fledged ospreys on
their first year of migration do it alone. So Sacha is keen to find out where
they've got to. He's got a few more days to go. He's got a few more days to go.
He's got a few more days to go. The bird that has had the most painless journey
and the simplest one is a bird called Tweed. It headed off to the south coast
and then actually was blown in quite an arc, so it did disappear off the radar
for a while, but the wind pattern that it ended up in also would have blown it
back in towards the north coast of Portugal. So it could have potentially been
quite an easy journey, despite the fact that it went right out across the Bay of
Biscay and completely missed France. So yeah, he's been in Portugal for well
over a week now, maybe nearly two weeks in the north-west feeding. Might find
that's a place that he can actually stay for the entire winter. He's found what
seems to be sort of osprey paradise there in the Avira Lagoon. Diane Bennett
from Forestry and Land Scotland is keeping track of their movements. And he's
just having quite lazy days. There seems to be like small fishing trips and then
the rest of the time just resting and roosting in trees along the sand dunes. So
no concerns for him. Tweed's brother, Kirk, has had a less easy time of it.
After a fairly promising start. Pretty much made a beeline for Dartmoor to a
small river, which is only about 10, 15 kilometres from my home on Dartmoor.
Then it made a kind of move off to the west and then ended up in Ireland. Why
would he have headed west? That's a good question. The time he headed west,
there was strong winds from the east. So he's ended up in Killarney National
Park. There's a river running through that. And Kirk was spending time flying
around the area, fishing along the river. And then suddenly on the morning of
the 5th, headed off in a northwesterly direction. The speed that the bird was
doing at these points were like 29 kilometres an hour and then 70 kilometres an
hour and then up to 92 kilometres an hour and then back down to 85 kilometres an
hour. At that point, that position one, I'll just refer to my notes here, but he
was travelling at 95 kilometres per hour. It seems a little extraordinary. You
know, it's a sudden zoom. Could that be a gusting wind that's lifted him and
blew him across? I mean, it is a day with an incredible pressure system down
here, which is creating pretty strong winds. So I'd say the weather system might
have just completely acted against him. Yeah. And then, yeah, day went past, two
days went past and it's now been well over a week and there's been no more sign
of the birds. So presumably he's become lost at sea, really? Looking at the
bigger picture, wind patterns in that whole region of sea, there's almost zero
chance that he could have made it back to land, certainly not heading towards
Europe. So, yeah, we think that Kirk has become one of those statistics, one of
the 70 to 80 percent of young birds that never make it back. It's still a relief
that we have two of the young birds that are still alive and on migration. But
yeah, sad that Kirk isn't with us anymore. It is sad, isn't it? I mean, this is
all good data. And, you know, as scientists, you obviously understand that some
of the birds you're tracking are not going to make it. But it is still sad when
it happens, isn't it? To have any of the birds go is sad and the scientist in me
wants to see it as just a statistic, but the human can't help but see it as
something a bit more. In the next episode, we'll get an update from the third
tagged osprey, Kirk and Tweed's brother, Glenn, who's been on quite the
adventure. And the team speeds south through Spain, towards the coast. They're
crossing as fast as they can towards Tarifa and Gibraltar. The shortest possible
crossing between mainland Spain and the north of Africa. Flight of the Ospreys
was produced by Emily Knight and Alistair Cross, and the journey continues at
the same time tomorrow. The Archers is next this afternoon. Tony and Lillian
have something important to discuss and Helen tries to cheer up Lee. And then at
a quarter past two, it's the finale of our drama charting the rise of the Nazis.
It's January 1933 and Germany's political establishment grants Hitler the
chancellorship. Chat GPT is the artificial intelligence technology that seems to
be... We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via
third party services and platforms. And the BBC stream you are currently
listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio
or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If
you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC
Sounds.