TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Earlier it's neighbour Victoria Smith's new book. She will be on the programme
tomorrow. But that is it from us for today. Our editors were Purvi Patni and
Joshua Searle. The studio director was Matt Cadman. From all of us, good
morning. BBC News at nine o'clock. The Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, has
dismissed concerns expressed by the UN Refugee Agency about the government's
plan to cut the number of people crossing the Channel in small boats. A new law
will effectively ban anyone who arrives via an illegal route from claiming
asylum in the UK, prompting the UNHCR to warn of a clear breach of the Refugee
Convention. But Ms Braverman told Today she was confident the measures were
lawful. These measures have been rigorously tested amongst an army of lawyers
internally and we are very clear that we are within the boundaries of the law
but we are trying new arguments, we are testing novel interpretations of the law
but we do not consider that we have crossed the boundary and we do not consider
that we are in unlawful territory. A weekly injection which helps people lose
weight has been approved for use by the NHS in England. So Maglutide will be
available only through specialist services for a maximum of two years. Evidence
shows that once people stop taking the drug their weight starts increasing.
Train companies have renewed calls for the RMT Rail Union to put their most
recent pay offer to members who are scheduled to stage four strikes over the
next three weeks. Last night the union announced it had suspended walkouts by
signallers and maintenance workers at Network Rail to vote on an improved deal.
A BBC investigation has found that the number of dog attacks recorded by police
in England and Wales has risen by more than a third in the past five years. Last
year there were nearly 22,000 cases of out-of-control dogs causing injury. In
2018 there were just over 16,000. A new study suggests that bumblebees which
learn how to solve challenges then teach others to do the same. Scientists from
Queen Mary University of London trained a set of bees to open a puzzle box
containing a sugar reward and found the insects then passed on that knowledge to
others in their colonies. BBC News. This is BBC Radio 4. The Home Secretary was
on the Today programme this morning as we heard and Suella Braverman was the
subject of Profile a little while ago, our weekly feature about someone who's
been in the news. It's available now on BBC Sounds together with many other
editions featuring everyone from the Prime Minister of Italy, Giorgia Maloney,
to Sarah Lancashire and Kate Bush. So we've heard from the Home Secretary, later
this morning the Foreign Secretary will be on Woman's Hour, James Cleverley will
tell us why he's heading to Sierra Leone on International Women's Day. First a
new series of The Patch and the producer Polly Weston is off on another random
postcode adventure and this one is out of this world. Hello. This is Leslie. Are
you there? Yeah, I'm here. I met Leslie back in 2021 when a random postcode
generator sent me to the industrial estate in Lowestoft where she runs a CAF.
Where are you now? Are you still on your walk? I'm on, yeah, I'm on Caughton
Beach. She'd helped me uncover the story of an infamous business selling
uncatchable drug running boats which had begun on the industrial estate. Oh
Paddy, I'm sorry. No, he's all right. Now she'd agreed to help me again by
pressing the button to decide where my next destination would be. Create, right,
create a random postcode, yeah. So I've got to press that. Yeah, press that
button. Yeah, the grey button, yeah. This is The Patch, one random postcode. Are
you ready? Yeah. Generated by Leslie. IP264. And a story you probably haven't
heard before. Where do you think that is? I'd say it's Ipswich. I think you're
right. Today, Feltwell. The village of Feltwell. Feltwell? Feltwell? Norfolk. I
think actually this is Ipswich as well. Near Thetford. Oh that's right, yeah,
it's further inland, yeah. Do you know anything about that area? No, not really.
Right. Well, see what we can find out there. Sometimes we get a postcode which
people don't believe is random. The story seems too far-fetched or the setting
too extraordinary. Very early on it became apparent that IP264 was probably
going to be one of those. The first thing you notice is the sound. If it's a
weekday, you'll very likely hear this. Military fighter jets above the village.
And that's if you didn't notice the fighter jets whipping down over your head on
the road in. When I arrived, I did what I usually do when I get to a rural
village postcode. I went to the local pub, The Wellington. Inside was loud
American country music. This is because of Ralph. Ralph is 89. His son Stuart
owns the pub and his grandson Chris runs it. A man of routine and discipline.
Later, Stuart told me that he'd never seen Ralph in a set of braces which didn't
perfectly complement the rest of his outfit. And every day at midday, Ralph
comes in and cues up enough country music on the jukebox to keep the pub going
all afternoon. Digging up bones by Rowley and Travers. Yeah, that's right. Good
track. Good track. Yeah. Where were you born? Where are you from? I was born in
Alabama on the 27th of April 1933. I lived on a place called Coosie County Road.
It was sort of a log cabin more or less. And we had a tin roof on it and one
bedroom. How many brothers and sisters did you have? Oh, I had, it was nine of
us in the family. Five brothers and three sisters. And which, what number were
you? I was a knee baby next to the last. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Ralph the knee
baby grew up to be Ralph the teenager, enlisted with the US Air Force and the
Air Force brought him here. I got off the train and I thought, God, this is the
most desolate place I've ever seen. Nothing anywhere. It was just nothing.
What's that sound? That's an airplane. It could be one of them F-15s. You know,
they flying around today. Today's Tuesday. Because this area is home to RAF
Lakenheath, RAF Mildenhall and RAF Feltwell, which is actually in the postcode.
But these are not really RAF bases at all. They're all RAF sites which have been
used by the US Air Force for decades. What are they usually doing? We just train
them. Train them. Pilots got to stay trained. All of these pilots are very young
guys. There are thousands of American Air Force personnel in this area. They
are. You don't want the old guy flying. You got to have somebody with the nerve.
Don't get shook up. They fly that thing like a rocket. Mildenhall, about 10
miles down the road, was the first place Joe Biden visited overseas when he
became president. This is my first overseas trip as President of the United
States. I'm heading to the G7, then to the NATO ministerial and then to meet
with Mr Putin to let him know what I want him to know. And as tensions rose over
the war in Ukraine, he'd committed to more squadrons coming over here. One in
six overseas American military personnel are now stationed in Britain. Many of
them right here. At every point along the way, we're going to make it clear that
the United States is back and democracies of the world are standing together to
tackle the toughest challenges and the issues that matter most to our future.
Ralph had moved around a lot during his career. He had just served 14 months in
Vietnam when he was sent to Lake and Heath, and he and his wife decided to
settle in Feltwell in 1971. His son, Stuart, was 10 by then. I can remember when
we first got here and Stuart went to the old school here in the village, still
dressed in his California clothes. And when he first came home, he said, we're
not staying here, are we? I said, hell yeah, we just bought a house here. We're
staying here. He said, oh God, what am I going to do? Stuart remains a US
citizen, but he developed a fully fledged Norfolk accent. I'm like, this just
isn't for real. I thought it was like a little house on a prairie, a nightmare.
The main Air Force base here is Lake and Heath, just down the road. It's huge.
The 48th Fire Wing is probably the prestige fire wing in the United States Air
Force. RAF Feltwell is much less notable, except for three quite large things.
What does Feltwell do today? Feltwell today is housing military schools. And
there are some, there's some large domed... Three massive white domes sit on RAF
Feltwell. They're curved tops peeking out over the village roofs. When I asked
Ralph and Stuart about the domes, Stuart shifted in his seat slightly. So what
does that mean? It just means that there are domes and they're, they just
watch... They spy in the sky. They spy on the sky. And when his dad started to
chip in, I could see Stuart prodding his leg under the table. Why did you just
tap Ralph? Because that's all they need to do. That's all anyone needs to know.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's classified. The domes arrived back in 1989 under Reagan's
premiership. During the Cold War, Ronald Reagan was running the US. If we can
protect America with a defensive shield from incoming missile attacks, we should
by all means do so. He had stuff in the sky that you would never dream of. But I
interpreted from Stuart and Ralph's reaction that whatever the domes are there
for is very, very current. Um, those guys just do their job. They do their job
in order for us all to be safe. Freedom has a price. On my second day in
Feltwell, Stuart and Ralph gave me a tour of the village. Oh look, and there's
those, they call them golf balls? Yeah, this is the golf balls. And how far
apart they are. Stuart collects old American vehicles and drove me round in a
bright blue 1964 Ford Mustang. Almost all there is classified, anyway. Cruising
our way inconspicuously around the perimeter of the military base. You can have
a look then, you can see, you can see more, see what size they are, look. Oh
wow. Yeah, they really do look like golf balls. At a guess, the three main domes
looked about the height of a four-storey building, if a four-storey building was
shaped like a golf ball. Big dishes outside as well. Stuart said he'd put in a
request for me to be allowed onto the base. But in the meantime, he introduced
me to various Air Force families who had recently moved into the area. Katie and
her husband work in administration. On the mantelpiece was a plastic model of a
very serious looking firearm. That is a toy. My husband's from Texas, so he has
quite a few firearms. And we were not allowed to bring them into the country,
which is fine. But for our anniversary, I asked him what he wanted, and he
wanted these figurines of his firearms. He said that if he wasn't going to have
them, that he might as well have something pretty to look at. They'd arrived in
the morning, and they were all in their own little boxes. They were all pretty
to look at. They'd arrived a few months before, and had a baby shortly after. We
had heard horror stories of people not really wanting Americans here. I think
from the get-go, we felt very welcomed, which was really pleasant, because not a
lot of people get that experience. I quickly realised the scale of operations
here, the different kinds of jobs people do, and how unlikely it was I was just
going to bump into someone who works on the domes. We're involved in everything
when you talk about the European theatre and what's going on. Jared runs a
squadron tuning equipment on the Feltwell base. Everybody's been very friendly.
We've never had a problem feeling like we didn't belong. Sadly, none of these
conversations got me any closer to finding out what the giant domes were up to.
What are the domes on Feltwell? We don't talk about the domes. But alongside the
American families who expect to spend a maximum of two to four years here are
people who have lived in the same street their whole lives. Were you here when
they arrived? Yeah, I suppose so. That's a long time. They've been there a long
time. I can't remember what year they got when they put them up. Four
generations of Linda's family had spent their life in the same house she lives
in today. Then down the road was her long-term family friend Michael. I was born
in this very street that we're in now. And have you ever lived anywhere else
other than this street? No, not really, no. And their old family friend Trevor
popped in to see Michael while we chatted. Michael and my Uncle John's friend.
None of them had a clearer answer or one they were willing to reveal about what
the domes were up to. Trevor, what do you think the domes do? I don't know. I
don't think too many people know. Everyone has their opinion, don't they? Oh
yeah, but they're like me, they keep it to themselves. But what was amazing to
me as an outsider was how normal all this was. I think people have got used to
it, just took it for normal. But they should be there. Because you see, we had
the Thor rockets in, I don't know what year. As normal as when the Thor nuclear
missile launcher arrived into the village back in 1958, and lived here until the
early 60s. From America, the first of the Thor intermediate range ballistic
missiles arriving by lorry at a bomb and command station near Feltwell in
Norfolk. It had a range which could reach Russia. Thor has a range of 1500 miles
and can deliver an H-bomb. Stuart had been waiting to get the all clear to take
me inside the fence at least. But we didn't hear back. I guessed that they had
bigger priorities than me. President Biden has said the risk of nuclear
Armageddon is at its highest level since the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962. World
politics suddenly felt a lot closer sitting in this village, with the jets
overhead and the domes on the horizon. We're fully prepared to defend, I'm going
to say this again, every single inch of NATO territory. Every single inch. So Mr
Putin, don't misunderstand what I'm saying. By now, I'd basically given up hope
of meeting anyone who had even been inside the domes. Oh, wait a minute, I think
I got it. And then I met Emi. Emi is from a traveller family. She's lived in the
village since the 1950s and runs a permanent yard sale from the driveway at the
back of her house. When I popped in to say hello, before I'd hardly managed to
explain who I was, she'd rope me in to helping her get an old children's slide
out of the back of her transit. Look at that! So, would you like a cup of tea?
Inside, we had tea surrounded by rich fabrics and the lifetime's worth of
antiques she's gathered. I was born where I'm going to end up, at Belvedere in
Kent. And she talked in this slightly cryptic way. I was born there, 85 years
ago. I could jump the moon, but now I feel like I have jumped it. It does look
like you're still jumping the moon, Emi. We just pulled a slide out of the back
of your van. We got to, didn't we? So, I'm selling stock and people give me
things. And it keeps my brain going. And what do you sell, then? You see what I
sell? You see what I sell? Everything and anything. But, no, I mean, there's no
money in it. But now I am contented because I open the heart, four o'clock I
close it, at four I'm in bed with my electric blanket. And I'm as happy as the
sand birds, you know. For a long time, her biggest customers were the Americans.
So, part of what you would do is you'd go and clear the military personnel's
houses? Oh, yeah. Well, I used to do health clearance. I cleared three colonel's
houses. Back in the day, the Americans were always having their own yard sales.
You don't see them now. They are amongst themselves and I used to love going to
the yard sales. So, was it much easier to just go on to the bases? Yeah, they're
not allowed now, you see. Since 9-11, you could walk on that base anywhere, but
you're not allowed to. But then we got on to talking about the domes. What are
the domes? What are they? The domes. Well, I've actually moved them. I've
handled them. No. Yes, I've been in and handled them. How? Because... Emmy had
been a member of the local history society. I belonged to the historic. And this
chap is dead now. They'd done all sorts of exciting trips. But before everything
changed, before all the security got tighter, the local historic society had
been given a tour of the domes. And Emmy had been inside. I went up in them
balls. I said, what are we looking for? He said, we know exactly what's up
there. We're looking for something that shouldn't be up there. And that's what
it's all about. So, what are they monitoring when you say things that shouldn't
be in the sky? That's right. What does that mean? I mean, if there's foreign
stuff. I left Feltwell with far more questions than answers. But after scouring
the internet for anyone who might be able to help me, I discovered the work of
Dr Bledin Bowen of Leicester University. Had you heard of Feltwell then before I
messaged you? A while ago, but it's not something that pops up on my radar very
often. He's a very rare expert in space policy. I didn't know really much of the
details until I started looking it up when you mentioned it. You know, the sort
of things that they do, which would be tracking the space system, you know, it
is very closely guarded. So, I'm not surprised that there's not a lot out there
on it. I'd got so hung up on finding someone who could tell me what the domes
were. I'd never asked who was responsible for them. I just assumed that because
it was a US Air Force base, the domes were part of the Air Force. But they
aren't. It is run by, you know, now the US Space Force, of course. So, you know,
it is an RAS air base, but it's really, you know, it's staffed really by the US
Space Force and formerly the US Air Force, of course. Space. There'll be a lot
of things happening in space. In December 2019, Donald Trump created the first
new branch of the US military since the Air Force. Space Force. Very
importantly, I'm hereby directing the Department of Defence and Pentagon to
immediately begin the process necessary to establish a Space Force as the sixth
branch of the armed forces. That's a big statement. Space Force. All I could
remember of the launch of the Space Force was a lot of late night satire and
general mocking of Donald Trump. But there's no threat in space. Who are we
fighting? Satellites? A bunch of frozen monkeys? Elon Musk's convertible? And I
definitely had no idea that the Space Force had a presence in rural Norfolk.
Because space is the world's newest warfighting domain. Amid grave threats to
our national security, American superiority in space is absolutely vital. But
clearly I was not alone. The Space Force, when it was announced, was kind of
laughed at. Yeah, by people who don't know anything about military space, yes.
Which is the majority of the population, isn't it? Yes, yes. And a lot of
satirists. So is it a silly concept? No. The US Space Force as an idea has been
spoken about for almost as long as the entirety of the US Air Force. Obviously,
the domes had existed for a long time before Space Force, which goes to show
that the work of Space Force is nothing new. Just the power structure is. It
doesn't help that it was Trump that did it. It really heightened the ease at
which people were able to ridicule it. And yet, looking at the Trump presidency,
it's one of the least ridiculous things he's done. The US dominate military
space. Much of the reason why the US military is the most effective conventional
fighting force in the world is because of its advantages in space. It has the
best space equipment, the best satellites, more of them than anyone else. With
hundreds of satellites above us feeding information back down to Earth for all
their military objectives, and civilian ones too, the GPS which you use on your
phone, Space Force is responsible for it. A lot of that infrastructure is
directly useful to Ukraine. So interesting, because we focus on munitions and
stuff a lot, don't we? But actually, this could be having as much, if not more,
of an impact. The level of information that is given to Ukraine from the US
military and intelligence remains to be seen. We may not know for a very long
time, but it's a question of the extent and detail of the sharing and timeliness
of it, rather than whether it's happening at all. Bledin had never been to
Feltwell, and so couldn't tell me for sure what was going on there. So I've only
been able to find reference to it on US Space Force sites, and really all it
seems to me is it's a pretty standard space tracking facility. Just that cog in
that massive military machine. But now I knew the management structure. I
thought I might have identified someone who might be able to tell me more.
General John J Raymond. Yes. If I put in a very serious request. You can try.
The first chief of space operations. With today's signing, I will proudly
appoint General J Raymond the first chief of space operations. He will be on the
Joint Chiefs, which are now expanding by one position. That's a very powerful
position. So in October of 2022, in a first for the patch, I contacted the
Pentagon. A very nice man in their team said that he was currently on travel to
Japan, that they tried to get this opportunity to him as soon as possible. I
followed up and followed up until the emails were a lot less positive. And
finally, I got one which said, General Raymond has retired. But I'd made a
discovery which made me even more determined to reach him. In an interview,
General Raymond's wife Molly mentioned that they themselves had been based in
Feltwell earlier in his career. And after a bit of sleuthing, I found an email
for her. And so. Hi, Polly. Good afternoon. Hi, Molly. How are you? Good. Very
good. Thank you for the opportunity today. Is it both of you? Are you both here?
Is it Molly and General Raymond? Yes, I'm here as well. Thank you. Good morning.
Hi. Nice to meet you. I was a bit thrown to be here having this conversation. Is
it General Raymond? Is that the right way to address you? Yes, ma'am. But it
turns out Feltwell meant a lot to them. We were excited to talk to you. You
know, Feltwell was very significant to us as well. That was my first command
assignment. The very first experience that I had that really potentially put me
on a path to move to higher ranks was the squadron at Feltwell. I mean, that was
a significant job for me. This was a chance for Molly and General Raymond to
reminisce about the year and a half they spent living in the village in 2000. So
do you remember when you first found out you were being sent there? What was the
context? I do. In fact, there's a little story about that. Molly was in the
hospital having just delivered our son. I was going to go pick her up and take
her home that day. And I had gotten a call that morning saying we were going to
go to England. And so we went to the hospital and that's where I broke it to
Molly. Oh, wow. It was just very unexpected and probably not what I had on my
mind that day after just giving birth that we were going to have to get ready
for an overseas move. We chatted for an hour. I remember lining the squadron up
in the parking lot and we were practicing. Is there a reason why people in Space
Command were famously not so good at marching? We just don't do it very often.
And finally, I popped the million dollar question. Are you allowed to tell me
what the domes do? Well, when I was there, the domes, that squadron was used for
space situational awareness. And so there's a lot of objects in space. And I
commanded a space surveillance squadron, which was used to help identify the
address, if you will, an address of an object in space. So back in the day when
General Raymond was working the domes, the squadron sounded like they were
something akin to space traffic wardens. Know where things are and then provide
warning to others to make sure two things don't collide in space. Those were the
days when ME and the local historic society might get a tour. That unit stood
down in 2001 and now it's an intelligence squadron that's used to help support
the Space Force's activities in the space domain. Today, their work is
classified. But General Raymond did say that what they're contributing to
touches our lives every day. I think one of the challenges that we have in the
space business is that it's hard for people to understand just how connected
they are to space each and every day. Because as you said, you can't see it, you
can't touch it, you can't feel it. We have a saying in the space business that
satellites don't have a mother. It's hard to have a connection with a satellite
that's orbiting many, many, many miles overhead. But you do have that
connection. Anything that's online today in this connected world that we live
in, all of that is enabled by space. And the Space Force's mission is to make
sure that those capabilities are always there for both societies and for our
military. General Raymond left Feltwell in the summer of 2001. And 18 years
later, one Donald Trump signed the legislation to form the Space Force. On the
20th December of 2019, when the president signed the law, he announced that I
was going to be the CSO. And that was really the first time that I had
confirmation that that was going to happen. So it was a little bit of long-time
planning, but it was me personally, it was a little bit of a surprise. He didn't
phone you before, no one phoned you before and said that that was going to be a
part of the announcement? Well, there was a rumour that it would be, but there
was no confirmation of it until that night. When he stood up at that podium and
said... Yeah, it was really cool. It's a night I'll never forget. So General
Raymond, congratulations and thank you for everything you've done. Remember
Polly from the BBC. I phoned round everyone in Feltwell. Hello. To say thank you
and share my discoveries. Yeah, so it's a Space Force squadron now. Oh goodness
gracious me. You would never have believed it. I had the distinct impression
that they were humouring me and my excitement. And it turns out that he lived in
Feltwell for two years. Oh my God. Who is that then? There were many more
important things afoot. John J. Raymond. The oldest one has just died. I think
you spoke to him, Mike Bannam, didn't you? Michael, who I'd met in the village
with Linda. He sadly passed away before Christmas, Emmy said. Oh, the church. I
mean, that was full. He would have been so impressed because everybody liked
him. Isn't that lovely? So, so what's happening now? Life in the village goes
on. Today is Stuart's birthday and I'm going up there for tea tonight. Oh, will
you tell him happy birthday from me? OK. Come on, let's not be cynical. Let's
not prejudge. Let's have a listen together. You'll access all areas past for the
BBC archive where... We unearth rare audio artefacts and we get lost on strange
and hopefully entertaining tangents. And it came back with the pig. Is that it?
Keep listening to find out. The new series of Rewinder. Oddly captivating. Hmm,
perhaps you're right. Saturday mornings at 10.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. I
mean, get the message. Now on Radio 4, Dr Michael Moseley tries out a small idea
to spice up your life. In this episode of Just One Thing, we join Michael in the
kitchen. Oh, wow. We would all like some quick and simple ways to improve our
health, but we're inundated with often conflicting advice. So if you were going
to try just one thing to improve your mental and physical well-being, what
should it be? Perhaps the martial art of Tai Chi to improve your immune system.
Maybe a few nuts to slow aging. Or how about cleaning your teeth to give your
brain a boost? I'm Dr Michael Moseley and this is Just One Thing, where each
episode we'll explore one thing you can start doing today to improve your health
or life in ways you might not expect. It's lunchtime and I'm throwing together a
vegetarian curry. I've got the onions here. And now they go into the frying pan.
You can hear them sizzle away. Leave that for a moment. And now to the most
important part. I'm about to add in something that could boost my mood and my
memory, and it may even reduce inflammation. I'm adding turmeric. You can buy it
fresh or as a dried spice, which is what I'm using, or even take it as a
supplement. OK, I think the onions are looking rather golden now, and time to
add in the turmeric powder. Wow, it's got a wonderfully bright colour. And quite
a strong aroma as well. Now, turmeric is a close relative of ginger, and if you
buy it fresh it has a similar knobbly, root-like look. But inside it's this
vibrant yellow-orange. The colour comes from a substance within it called
curcumin, and that's the compound scientists think is the key to turmeric's
benefits for the brain and body. Turmeric has been widely used for millennia in
many parts of the world, especially in South-East Asia, not just for cooking but
also as medicine. And there is new research showing it could be especially
beneficial for some types of pain. So is this something you'd like to use more?
I'm speaking to Yuxi, an office worker. Let's see if spicing up her life with
turmeric is just one thing she'd like to do. Hi there. Hello. Now, first of all,
do you enjoy cooking? I do enjoy cooking, but I wish I had a bit more time to
try different recipes. Right, and have you ever cooked with turmeric before? I
haven't actually. I've been wanting to incorporate more spices in my cooking.
Turmeric, as you may well know, is widely used in curries, but it's also
delicious in scrambled eggs, soups and yoghurts, or a turmeric pancake. What I
want you to do is to add one teaspoon a day to your cooking. It could be
breakfast, lunch or supper, however you want to do it, but one teaspoon a day.
Do you think you can manage that? That sounds OK. Yeah, I'm definitely up for
giving it a go. Be aware that it is a very bright yellow colour and it can
stain. That sounds good. Thanks for the heads up. I've asked Yushi to spice
things up with turmeric because this golden-hued powder not only adds colour and
flavouring to food, it's also been linked to some surprising health claims, from
boosting attention and working memory to improving asthma and eczema. The link
between turmeric and health is nothing new. It's been used in ancient Ayurvedic
medicine for thousands of years to alleviate liver problems and digestive
ailments. Over the last couple of decades or so, scientific research into
turmeric, and in particular into its active ingredient, curcumin, has exploded,
with lots of studies exploring the health effects of this golden spice. And some
of the findings have been impressive. Let's start with the brain. A Singaporean
study in 2022, following 2,700 older people for nearly five years, found those
who ate a lot of turmeric-rich curries, like korma, kept their brains in better
shape, when measured for things like working memory and problem-solving, than
those who didn't. The authors suggest that it's the curcumin, which is a
polyphenol in the turmeric, which is responsible for these positive effects.
Now, a big problem with curcumin is that normally very little of it gets
absorbed. So the scientists think that one of the reasons why they saw such good
results in their study is because when you consume curcumin with fat and certain
spices, this helps your body to absorb more of it. It's a great excuse to add it
to curry. And if you don't fancy curry, then you might consider a curcumin
supplement. In an Australian study where they gave curcumin in pill form to 80
older individuals, they found that compared to placebo, taking the supplements
improved working memory and reduced fatigue. One way it might be working is by
reducing inflammation. In a recent Japanese study where overweight but otherwise
healthy participants were randomly allocated to placebo or curcumin extract,
they found those taking the supplements had lower levels of an inflammatory
marker in the blood called C-reactive protein. And as we'll discover in a
moment, it appears turmeric can also relieve pain. I'll be delving into that
with an expert shortly. But first, let's check in with Yushi. The first recipe I
tried was the chicken korma, and the taste was really good overall. It was a
nice bright yellow colour. It did stain things. The wooden spoon that I use for
cooking is now just permanently yellow. The challenge has really inspired me to
be a bit more adventurous with the food that I make. I'm looking forward to the
rest of the week. We'll catch up with Yushi at the end of the week and see if
she can find some tasty ways to incorporate turmeric into her diet. But now to
get the low down on turmeric, I'm speaking to Dr. Benny Antony from the Menzies
Institute of Medical Research at the University of Tasmania in Australia. G'day.
Good day, Michael. Now, what would you say are the main benefits of turmeric?
Turmeric has been used for centuries in Ayurvedic medicine, that is a
traditional Indian medicine, as well as traditional Chinese medicine. But only
recently, people have identified the active components such as the curcumin. So
turmeric has been mainly known as an anti-inflammatory agent. It is also known
to be an antioxidant. Therefore, it can be useful for chronic conditions. It's
also got antifungal properties and some wound healing properties. So what not?
It's got many properties. Now, I know you have done clinical trials looking at
the benefits of using turmeric in arthritis. Can you tell me about that? So this
clinical trial involved 70 patients. So we selected patients based on pain as
well as based on the joint inflammation. So we randomized 35 people into placebo
group and 35 people into the active group who received the turmeric extract. And
then we followed these patients over 12 weeks. And we found that the
participants who were taking the turmeric extracts had relief in pain compared
to the placebo group. Obviously, both placebo and treatment group both reduced
the knee pain. But the treatment group had further reduction compared to placebo
group. Right. Because we know the placebo effect is very powerful, particularly
in pain. So oddly enough, you would actually have to be quite impressive to
outdo the placebo in this context. And did it affect the amount of pain
medication they were taking? Yeah, that's one of the interesting or secondary
outcomes of this trial was that there was a reduction in the number of
medications which they were taking for their knee pain. So how does turmeric
compare to a standard painkiller like ibuprofen? In our trial, we did not really
compare turmeric extract with a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug. However,
we can indirectly compare the effect size of the treatment. That means we found
a modest effect of the treatment compared to placebo. And similarly, the non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as the ibuprofen have got only a modest
effect. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as the ibuprofen seems to
have a lot of contraindications. That means they cannot be taken in older
patients. And a lot of these drugs have more severe adverse events such as the
gastrointestinal bleeding or cardiovascular events. So compared to the non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, there seems to be no adverse event for
turmeric extract. Right. Did you also see an anti-inflammatory effect? Did they
actually have less inflammation in the joint? We did not find a significant
difference in local inflammation. And we also tested whether the turmeric
consumption led to a reduction in the inflammatory markers in the bloodstream.
And we did not find a significant effect of these biomarkers because of the
treatment of turmeric. So it's possible there is something else going on, that
turmeric is not necessarily acting by reducing inflammation. What do you think
that something else might be? So there is possibly other mechanisms that could
have explained the reduction in pain. Some studies suggest that turmeric might
have an effect in the gut brain axis that turmeric extracts, especially the
curcumin, can actually improve certain types of bacterial colony which reduce
the inflammation. So there is plenty of other evidence to say that turmeric can
reduce inflammation in a systemic level, and which is evidenced in the
biomarkers as well. OK. Now you are obviously focusing on osteoarthritis, which
is an inflammatory condition in the knee. Do you think it could be beneficial
for other types of pain? So what we have found is that it's been effective for
acute pain as well. It's not just for the chronic conditions as well, but it's
for normal, healthy people. It can be used to reduce the pain, although it still
needs more research in this area. If people do want to boost their turmeric
consumption, what's the best way of doing so? So if people want to increase the
active component in the turmeric, such as the curcumin in their body, the best
way to do it is to combine it with some pepper, because piperine seems to
increase the bioavailability, that means the increased absorption of curcumin in
the body. The other option is fatty food seems to increase the bioavailability
of curcumin. Obviously, I've got an Indian heritage, so I follow some of the
Indian cuisine. So I pour oil first and then I put turmeric powder on it. So
it's good for taste and it's going to increase the bioavailability. Right,
that's the science. Now let's check in one more time with Yushi to see how she's
getting on with turmeric. It's the end of the week. The turmeric ended up
tasting a lot nicer than I expected. I surprised myself with the range of
different dishes I was able to incorporate turmeric into. The turmeric pancakes
were really delicious. The turmeric gave the pancakes a really warm flavour. It
worked quite well with savoury toppings. I'll definitely be making the curry
again. Overall, I found the challenge a great success. I really enjoyed it. I'm
really glad to hear that Yushi has enjoyed her challenge and I've been adding
more turmeric to my diet. And I've discovered something novel which I do enjoy.
And that is having it as a latte. Now I've got some milk here and I'm going to
add it to my milk frother. There we go. Nice and frothed up. I'm adding a nice
teaspoon of turmeric and then giving it a good old stir. And it's certainly a
wonderfully orange colour. And the advantage of using milk is the fat means that
I'm going to absorb more of the good stuff as well. And it's also delicious. So
if you're looking for an excuse to have a delicious hot drink or perhaps that
curry you've been craving, here it is. Add in some turmeric. It could boost your
brain and take away your pain. So that's it. It's just one thing you can
incorporate into your daily routine which really could benefit your body and
life. If you want to hear more of the series, why not subscribe on BBC Sounds. I
didn't want them to know I was not a regular white applicant. People had their
guns and were ready to do battle. And they did. I don't think he's got a future
if the troops leave. I mean, I believe somebody will try to kill him. Here's
Teresa Gannaher. Henry is usually smartly turned out, smelling of powder and
lavender. Only Henry knows how much effort this entails. Whenever he tries to
cut her nails, give her a bath or change her clothes, Ida's small face contorts
into something unrecognizable. She becomes like a fierce, cornered animal. Henry
and Ida's families immigrated to New York from Austria in the 1930s when both
were teenagers. They met at the City College of New York, and in 1953, one year
to the day after graduation, they were married. Allowing for the usual ups and
downs, their marriage was a good one. They liked the same novels and films and
shared a love of chamber music. Their apartment is lined with books and a large
collection of Deutsche Grammophon LPs. In her mid-70s, Ida began showing signs
of Alzheimer's. Her decline was gradual. She experienced the usual memory loss
and attendant confusion, but life went on pretty much as before. Then one day,
Henry came home to find Ida speaking to a framed photograph on the mantelpiece.
They had many photographs of departed friends and family around the apartment,
and Ida began to go from one to another, telling aunts and cousins whatever she
happened to be thinking about. After the initial shock wore off, Henry became
used to her chatter and resigned himself to this new quirk of hers. He'd
obviously known her friends and relatives, and he didn't mind their playing a
role in her imaginative life. Once Ida turned 80, she also began having
conversations with books, not in the sense of communing with the characters, but
with the authors themselves, or more accurately, with their jacket photos. To
Proust, she might talk about her childhood in Vienna. To Virginia Woolf, she
spoke of her honeymoon and how Henry had once gotten lost in Venice. To Rilke,
she spoke about fashion, porcelain, and popular music. As time passed, Henry
began to feel like an intruder in his own home. She'll talk to them with the
tenderness that's missing when she talks to me, a bereft Henry told me. Their
shared appreciation of certain writers, which had once united them, now put a
wedge between them. How was he supposed to compete? He became envious of the
photographs and sometimes eavesdropped. Then when she accused him of spying, he
felt terrible. One sunny afternoon when Henry and I met, he informed me that the
night before, Ida had invited a guest for dinner, the Austrian writer, Stefan
Zweig, who died in 1942. The dinner had not gone well. After putting food on the
table, Ida had directed all her remarks to the cover of The World of Yesterday,
except when she asked Henry to pass a roll to their guest. This request cracked
his self-resolve. You have ridiculous delusions, he shouted. It's a picture.
Pictures do not eat. Your craziness is making me crazy. Recounting this to me,
Henry smiled. It felt good telling her. But the feeling had been quickly
replaced by guilt. Ida sulked and stopped eating. Touched by her vulnerability
and the absurdity of his small victory, Henry had apologized and begged for
forgiveness. His outburst, he confessed, had left him rattled and miserable.
Henry couldn't shake off the sting of Ida's daily rejections. He knew they
weren't personal, but they felt personal. Henry was, as he readily admitted, a
people pleaser. After Ida fell ill, after she no longer even recognized him,
except as someone who looked after her, he still wanted to make her happy. But
he also wanted her to know that he was trying to help. Mocking himself, he told
me, what do I expect for her to say, oh, you're such a good husband? He felt
ashamed at trying to win her approval, knowing that his first concern should be
her welfare rather than his self-esteem. We berate ourselves for taking things
personally, for wanting the approval of people, even those who are neither
cognitively nor emotionally equipped to give it. But the medial prefrontal
cortex, the part of the brain that is activated when we think about who we are,
is also activated when we reflect on how others perceive us. Neurologically
speaking, there is no special place in the brain that is hermetically sealed
from the influence of other people. The self is porous. So when caregivers are
yelled at, lied to, ignored, unfairly accused or not recognized, how can this
not affect their sense of self? Let's consider another scenario in which three
people find themselves in a nondescript room. They are volunteers in an
experiment. One of them spies a ball in a corner. He picks it up and casually
tosses it to another person, who then tosses it to the third. Soon they are
playing a nice, unhurried game of catch until, without warning, two of the
players decide to stop playing with the third. They ignore him. The person left
out can only watch helplessly as the game continues without him. As it happens,
this interaction is the experiment. Two of the people are confederates. The
third isn't in on the secret. The game, created by the psychologist Kip
Williams, is called Cyberball. And because the stakes are fairly low, we might,
picturing ourselves in the role of the third person, believe we would take our
exclusion from this silly game in our stride. But we would be deluding
ourselves. This point was reinforced by social psychologist Matthew Lieberman.
He asked people to play digital cyberball with two other players. Although the
subjects believed they were playing with real people, they were actually playing
with programmed avatars that eventually began to exclude the subject. As
expected, a good many of the participants expressed hurt and anger over the
rejection. Brain scans revealed that the area in the brain sensitive to social
pain had been activated. All this could have been predicted. The real surprise
came when participants were informed that their opponents were avatar's computer
programmed to reject them. Even after they knew it was a machine, they still
experienced social pain. I thought about this experiment when Henry confessed
that he was jealous of Stefan Zweig. Jealous of Stefan Zweig? He couldn't
believe it. But I could. If we can become upset by computers' rejection, how can
we not feel social pain when ignored, dismissed, or accused by people we know
and love? Ida's dementia made her no less a person to Henry, nor did it matter
that her other relationships were imaginary. What mattered was that Ida was
living her life without him. Human beings, along with other mammals, have
evolved to feel isolation as painful, rejection literally hurts. The effect of
loneliness on physical and emotional health is well established. The effect on
cognitive health, however, has only recently come to light. Loneliness shortens
attention span and interferes with judgment and self-control, the very
attributes required to deal with a patient's fixations and delusions. Kathy is
petite, in her late 60s, with short-cropped, shiny gray hair and a warm,
tremulous voice. For six years, she had been taking care of her husband, Frank.
Frank had always been the more religiously conservative one, and when he
developed Alzheimer's, his Catholicism became more pronounced. It's like being
married to the Pope, she said. Because Alzheimer's disease routinely triggers
our attachment system, that innate impulse to seek out a safe haven during times
of stress, patients, in addition to fixating on their parents or childhood
homes, often take comfort in religion, another secure base. But while Frank was
able to sublimate his internal chaos by turning to ritual, Kathy had no one and
nothing to turn to. It wasn't only his religiosity that narrowed her existence.
Frank had taken to watching TV all day long. He would yell at the actors,
warning them of some impending disaster. And if an attractive actress showed up,
he might suddenly shout, That woman is about to take her top off! His impromptu
yelling and ridiculous predictions sucked the joy out of everything. One
evening, after a few months of this, Kathy abruptly stood up and escaped to the
bathroom. I couldn't sit there and keep my mouth shut, but I didn't want to
argue with him, Kathy told me. So I went off where I could scream. You know, if
someone had told me before Frank got Alzheimer's that all I had to do was agree
with him and accept his reality, I would have said, Sure, what's so hard about
that? I should be able to take his yelling and stupid predictions. Instead, I
correct him. I tell him Errol Flynn isn't going to die. I tell him Doris Day
isn't going to take her blouse off. Why do I do that? I mean, why do I care what
the hell he says? I should let it go. It's not his fault. Although she resented
Frank for not understanding what the disease was doing to him, Kathy did not
truly appreciate what the disease was doing to her. Dementia affects emotional
regulation, so while we naturally expect patients to lose it every so often, we
expect ourselves to keep it together. At first blush, this makes sense. Unlike
the impaired brain, the healthy brain has an intact prefrontal cortex, where
self-regulation takes place. Nonetheless, this is no guarantee that we can
always self-regulate. Scientists have identified two kinds of regulation
strategies in the prefrontal cortex, automatic and effortful. Self-regulation is
effortful, when we experience a threat whilst on our own. More energy is then
required to de-escalate emotions like anger and sadness. Co-regulation, on the
other hand, is automatic, meaning that threats feel less overwhelming from
within a community. Hence, people in healthy and supportive relationships feel
threats less intensely than people who feel alone. But that doesn't mean that a
relationship is necessarily beneficial. If, like Kathy, we're technically not
alone but feel alone, self-regulation becomes effortful. Is it any wonder that
dementia caregivers struggle to keep their anger in check? Despite everything
she did to make him feel safe, Frank still refused to crack open a window. OK,
of course, I get it, Kathy told me. I mean, the poor guy is riddled with
delusions, but I do everything for him, and I can't even get a little fresh air?
I get so angry about how unfair it is, and then I feel so petty and selfish for
feeling this way. Kathy's reaction was understandable. Unfairness is not really
about getting your own way. It's not about a shut window. Unfairness marks a
loss of social connection, a feeling that one more implicit social agreement has
been cancelled. According to Lieberman, fairness not only feels right, it also
registers in the brain as deeply pleasurable. Fairness, he writes, tastes like
chocolate. There is nothing fair about a long-standing relationship suddenly
becoming one-sided. It isn't fair to lose a mutual reality that once sustained
the closeness that dementia is now stealing away. It isn't fair to be left
alone. It doesn't feel good, and it doesn't bring out the good in us. And a look
back at a golden weekend in athletics for Team GB. Ah, magical!