TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 And this week, they're looking to the stars. That's coming up in a couple of
minutes here on Radio 4. The focus is the dissident Republican group, the New
IRA. Liam Kelly, the chair of the Police Federation of Northern Ireland, says
the New IRA are dangerous. They've had a diminished threat because the security
services in conjunction with the PSNI and our partners have been able to
infiltrate the group. And we've had a number of successes over the last few
years in relation to them. But they still have a cohort of support and
experience. And they are obviously posing a threat. And that manifested itself
last night. Local figures show that a record number of asylum seekers are
waiting for a decision on their case. There are 166,000 people currently in the
backlog. Of those, 110,000 have been waiting more than six months. Ambulance
handover delays outside hospitals in England have jumped to their highest weekly
level since early January. A quarter of ambulance patients waited at least 30
minutes last week to be transferred to A&E teams. Ten percent of patients had to
wait over an hour. Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky has said he would
welcome a chance to meet representatives from China. Mr Zelensky didn't give any
details of how this might happen, but he was speaking a day after the most
senior Chinese diplomat, Wang Yi, visited Russia. Mr Wang praised Beijing's
relationship with Moscow, but also offered to mediate in the war with Ukraine.
Staff working at the European Commission have been ordered to remove the TikTok
app from their phones and many other devices which run official EU programmes.
TikTok, which is owned by the Chinese company ByteDance, has faced numerous
allegations that it harvests users' data and hands it to the Chinese government.
BBC News. BBC Inside Science is in half an hour and this week they have a focus
on Antarctic sea ice. Earlier this week, ice coverage hit a record-breaking low,
so we'll hear what this means for the continent and the rest of the world. Also
we'll find out how underwater microphones are helping scientists learn more
about the human impact on marine wildlife. We'll join Victoria Gill at half past
four. But first here on Radio 4, it's time to join those infinite monkeys. I'm
Robin Inks. And I'm Brian Cox and this is a new series of the Infinite Monkey
Cage. And today we are in Australia again. Of course we're in Australia because
as many Australians will know, when you've kind of got a sitcom in Britain that
eventually is starting to fall apart and reach the end of its life, it comes to
Australia. So are you being served? Tony Hancock, Love Thy Neighbour, all of
them eventually found themselves here and so do we. I wouldn't say we're a
sitcom. There's no place for comedy in science. That's why we work well
together, actually. Meow. And turns out, Schrodinger, the cat was alive. That
was my first and only ad lib of the evening. Which is weird because when I hear
you talking about physics, I think you're making it all up. One of the great
joys of the southern skies is the view afforded of our galaxy, the Milky Way.
The southern hemisphere points directly towards the galactic centre and the rich
star clouds of Sagittarius, the constellation of the Archer. And of course
that's one of the reasons that we've picked that particular one, the
constellation of the Archer, because anyone here who is a regular Radio 4
listener knows that anything that involves the everyday story of country folk,
even if it is from an astronomical point of view, wins over an audience. And
this, by the way, was a joke that Brian suggested that we put in and he said
it's really going to work. And that shows... Both of us are doing heavy lifting
but very much in different genres here. Does anyone have a clue what the
Archer's is? Yes. I see. So it just wasn't funny then. You all got all the
context and all the background. I think it was because you said Archer singly.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I think that's one of the problems. It was the singular rather
than the Archer's, which suggests the everyday story of country folk. So I think
you'll find it was your delivery initially that destroyed that. But it's not
called... It's the Archer, isn't it? It's called the Archer. Yeah, I know.
That's the problem. You see, this is the issue with doing jokes and mixing them
with science, is because science has to be accurate, very often that means...
Whereas comedy involves misunderstandings, right? Whereas you go, a
misunderstanding, I cannot have that. That is not the Schwarzschild radius at
all. But it is if we're going to do the black hole joke. Well, we can't do the
joke then. If you want to talk about science, what you've employed is the
Schuller principle. And that's a very specific Archer's joke. There was a
character called Schuller in it for many years. Well, I'll tell you what, we
still haven't got a laugh, but you get a lot of respect. You get a lot of
respect for being niche. We're doing jokes about the Archer's in Sydney for an
Australian audience. Now you do your next bit, which is you sounding a bit like
Carl Sagan. The deeds of heroes and gods in the skies. Yep, go on. The night sky
is a place of beauty and legend. The stars have always told us stories of
origins and endings. And the deeds of heroes and gods. But what stories do the
stars tell us today? What secrets do they reveal when we gaze at them, not with
human eyes, but with the telescopes and instruments of the 21st century? Today
we are at the Powerhouse Museum in Sydney, and with us to discuss the magic of
the southern sky and its stories past, present and future, we are joined by two
astrophysicists and the 11th greatest stand-up in the world. And they are... I'm
Kirsten Banks. I'm an astrophysicist and science communicator. And the weirdest
thing I've seen in the night sky is while working at Sydney Observatory as a
tour guide, I saw this really bright light, thinking maybe it was Venus, but it
was in the wrong spot. So then my undergrad brain went, am I seeing a star
exploding? No, it was just a plane. I'm Devika, and I'm a stellar astrophysicist
and a senior lecturer at Macquarie University. Something in the night sky that
really touched my heart was the transit of Venus in 2004. Now, the transit of
Venus is very special because it is an event that, you know, back in the 1770s,
when Captain James Cook came looking for it in the Pacific Ocean, he didn't
really see the transit as well. But he did land up mapping, or rather
discovering, Australia. So the transit of Venus helped him sort of spot
Australia. And in my case, I was a student back in India in 2004. I saw the
transit of Venus and I landed up in Australia for my PhD. I'm Ross Noble. I'm a
stand-up comedian. And the weirdest thing I've ever seen in the night sky was a
strange pulsating orb. I was in Wales. I won't tell you what I was doing, but I
was on a Welsh mountain in the dark. I was having a wee. I'll be honest, I was
having a wee. And behind me, a strange red orb started pulsating. And I looked
up thinking it was a UFO, right? It was the red light on top of a wind turbine.
And every time the blades went round, it went on and off. Not a UFO at all. I
presumed it was the police. We've told you before. Yes, you're right. I was not
urinating on that slide. But it's also completely inaccurate because it's not in
the sky then, is it? It's on top of a wind turbine. It was bloody high, though.
Hang on. Sorry. First question from a layman's point of view. Where does the sky
begin? Oh, I've gotten this question on TikTok many, many times. On TikTok.
Sorry, it wasn't accompanied with a dance. That's the secret. You've got to
dance while you're doing your science. Where does the sky, because I've got a
big ladder. That's a good start. I've got a big ladder. When Jimi Hendrix said,
excuse me, well, kiss the sky, is it possible to do that with a ladder? Well,
see, I would argue that the sky starts where Rayleigh scattering happens, where
we get the blueness of the sky. And that happens in some kilometres above the
ground. How many kilometres? Some. Some. Yes. Right. Where the blueness starts.
I'm from the northeast of England. I didn't see blue sky. Technically that means
there's no sky. How about anything above the horizon? That could be sky. That's
very far away, though. You see how difficult it is doing this show. I was hoping
we were going to deal with the death of stars, but I don't think we're really
going to get beyond the end of the pier, are we? Anyway, this is our panel. So I
was impressed when you were talking about Captain Cook, the transit of Venus.
The difference between when you came here and he did is you worked out you
hadn't discovered it, that there were people here already and you weren't the
first. Very true. Kirsten, we'll start off with you grew up under Australian
skies. And I think for a lot of people, they think the sky, wherever you are in
the world, is the sky and you'll get roughly the same thing. And then you come
to the Southern Hemisphere and you discover that this is a totally different
picture. Oh, yes. I believe we have the best view of the night sky here in
Australia and other Southern Hemisphere countries, of course. But that's
because, like you said at the start, Brian, that we have the most privileged
position where we look directly at the centre of the galaxy. And there is so
many stars, but also not stars there as well, where you can see some really
interesting patterns within the dusty bands of our Milky Way galaxy. And Devika,
many people listening to this will not have seen the majesty of the southern
sky. So could you take us through some of the highlights that you see? Sure. So
I grew up in the Northern Hemisphere in the southern parts of India. So I was
very familiar with the northern sky. And then when I came to Australia, the
first thing I noticed was everything was upside down. This is down under and
everything. Orion, one of all our favourite constellations, was upside down. And
I was like, why is the hunter upside down? And I realised, well, that's
Australia. It's just different. But the southern sky, as Kirsten said, is just
spectacularly beautiful, though it confuses you in terms of orientation. Because
the other thing that you only see in the Southern Hemisphere is the closest star
to our sun, which is Alpha Centauri. You cannot see this in the Northern
Hemisphere. You have our sun and we're all happily enjoying planet Earth for as
long as it lasts. But then there's another star, Alpha Centauri. So there's a
lot of new objects that you can't see in the Southern Hemisphere that you can.
Now one that you can see in both hemispheres is Andromeda, which is the closest
galactic system. And you can see that in the Northern Hemisphere. But for three
months, which is kind of now-ish, you can see it in the Southern Hemisphere. So
there's a spectacular system. It feels to me like if anyone here has ever been
on one of those universal studio tours, I would always pick the wrong side of
the ride to go on. So Jaws would always be coming out of the water on the right-
hand side when I was sat on the left. The Bates Motel would always be on the
left-hand side if I was on the right. And that's kind of what it's like being in
the Northern Hemisphere, isn't it? We're looking right at the arse end of the
galaxy. And there's a great view down here, isn't there? I mean, that's the
thing, is we see a very different sense of even the potential of the stars. For
our listeners, arse end means outer spiral arm. Arse end was a very popular
sitcom in the late 1950s. Please welcome Kenneth Hornwith, Arse End. And a
lovely suburb of London as well. It's weird, isn't it? Because you said before
about Orion being upside down. And I thought the first time I came here, and I
saw that, because that is the one that you notice. And you think, thank God he's
got a belt on. His trousers will fall down. That's all the Australian beer.
That's what it is. And Kirsten, it's interesting we refer to Orion, because
that's one of the legends. It's Orion the hunter. But you're a Wiradjuri woman.
And so you grew up with different stories of the stars. Could you take us
through some of the stories in the sky? I would actually love to share with you
one about Orion, but we call it by a different name. In Wiradjuri, we call it
Biyami. It's the creator spirit. But what's interesting about this is that it's
the exact same stars creating the picture of a man. But to Wiradjuri
perspective, it's the same orientation as Orion, upside down, which seems weird
when you first think about it. Like we're on the right side of the world, and it
should be the right way up on this right side of the world. But it's not. It's
upside down. And that links into one of the stories where Biyami is chasing an
emu, which we call Dinawan. And as he's chasing Dinawan, the emu, he trips over
a log and falls flat on his face. Not so great for the creator spirit. But that
is reflected in the stars. If you watch Orion, or the stars of Orion, the stars
of Biyami, setting in the western sky, he sets head first into the ground, just
like falling into the ground like the story. It's illustrated in the stars.
That's interesting that you would build the stories around an upside down
character. Because he was chasing the emu, whereas in the northern hemisphere,
we have an emu that chases people with an old man called Rod Hull. I think
they're a richer story. That's astronomy, really. It's looking up at the sky and
trying to figure out what's out there. So you know, different cultures looked at
it through different times, and they interpreted the way they saw it. The emu is
the only constellation that is not made solely of stars. That's right. In
Wiradjuri, we call it Gugamun. And if you look for the Southern Cross, one of
the most iconic constellations in the southern hemisphere, in a place with very
little light pollution, you're not going to get it here in Sydney,
unfortunately. But just below the Southern Cross, you have this dark triangle
shape of dust that we call the Colsac Nebula in Western astronomy. But it makes
the head of Gugamun, the head of the emu. And as you continue along the sky
towards the center, massive bulge of our galaxy, you have this thin band that
makes a long neck of the emu. And then the bulge of the galaxy is the body of
the emu. And its position in the night sky indicates to us as Wiradjuri people,
when is the right time to go looking for emu eggs? So when it's kind of just
coming up above the horizon after the sun has gone down, it kind of looks like
an emu running along the horizon. So that maps and mirrors down onto the ground
that the Dinhuan, the ground emu, are running around looking for a mate. But
then later in the year, as the Earth moves further around its path around the
sun, that center of our galaxy rises higher and higher into the sky. And then
our perspective changes again. Instead of it being a body of an emu anymore,
it's now an emu egg in a nest. And that tells us that now is the right time to
go looking for emu eggs. It seems that a lot of First Nation astronomy has been
ignored until more recently. And there's a lot more books coming out of this.
And it seems that there was a lot of First Nation astronomy was kind of
dismissed because it was interpreted as being literal, as opposed to the fact
that's the way we remember by having these vivid tales. Absolutely, much easier
than any textbook. To the untrained eye, people who aren't astronomers, we look
at the sky and you see points of light. And all those points of light basically
look the same. And so could you take us through the differences that are up
there? Right. How much time do we have for this program? Because there are many
types of stars out there. What are you doing? Have you got any plans for
Thursday? Or Friday? We're fine. And as we also know, time is an illusion,
possibly a construct. Oh, fantastic. So we can ignore it entirely. Yeah. So
let's start at the very beginning. The sun is a star. It's a pretty ordinary
star. It's currently burning hydrogen in its core, turning it into helium. It's
a main sequence star. Most of the stars we see in the night sky are in this
category of main sequence. But eventually when stars like our sun run out of
that nuclear fuel in their cores, the core itself will shrink because it's no
longer being held up by this pressure of nuclear furnace. And it starts to grow
bigger and bigger and turn into a red giant. And eventually, depending on what
type of star you are, you'll go through a different category or a different
journey of life. If you're more massive, you have more mass as a star, you will
live fast, die young. Massive stars do it well. And you'll turn into... Thank
you. I'm sometimes funny too. But you have these big red giant stars. There are
different categories of red giant stars. You have your red giant branch, which
is like a branch on this graph that we show in astronomy. You have your red
clumps, which are a clump of red stars in the big graph as well. We're really
good at naming things in astronomy. Is that the technical term, a red clump?
Yes, literally called a red clump. That is my entire PhD on the red clump stars.
Yes. That's what you found in the plug after Ed Sheeran's been around. I love
it. The speed you drag it down is incredible. That even had a visualization of
someone being dragged down as well as you doing it. Beautiful. It's the best.
Because Kirsten said I can be funny too. You were like, no way. I've got an Ed
Sheeran gag now. Red clump's the best thing I've ever heard. Oh, yes. So what is
a red clump? A red clump star is a type of red giant that is burning helium in
its core. So it's gotten rid of all the hydrogen. The core's kind of just hung
out just being helium for a little while, while a shell of hydrogen fusion is
happening outside the core, creating more helium that's heavier than hydrogen.
So it's falling down into the core until it gets to a point where it's, I
believe, about 1.4 times the mass of our sun. And then that helium ignites in
what we call a helium flash. Again, we're really good at naming things in
astronomy. And then when it's burning helium in its core, that's a red clump
star. I don't feel bad, by the way, just about astronomy's naming things. Look
at biology. Blobfish. All that evolution, and what do you end up being named?
Blobfish. It's not fair, is it? I must say, it's quite accessible, though. It
looks like a blob. It's a fish. It's a blobfish. And it does look quite like a
blob as well. But doesn't the blobfish, when it's in the water, it only blobs
when you take it out of the water? Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's very disappointing.
Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. When it's floating, it's all right. Yeah, it's
magisterial. Non-blobfish. Yeah, it's exactly what you don't want. This is a
show about astronomy. Stop talking about this stuff. Let's get back to the
record. Like a star's dead, and then the light takes so long. I don't need to
explain this to you, but if that was... No, no, Ross, I want you to. Come on.
Let's have this moment. Go ahead and try. You amuse me. Kirsten did jokes.
You're allowed to do silly explanations. I'm just saying, that would be deeply
unsettling. If your gran died, but you could still see the light coming off her
at the funeral, you'd go, do you want a sandwich? Ah, you're going to be dead.
Give it a thousand years, I'll be gone. Brian, can I just say, you've never
looked more confused. I'm just trying to work out how to steer it back. I think
you've been steering it back all the time. It's absolutely fine. Devika, your
research is based on, first of all, measuring the composition of stars. Could
you run through how it is that just from the light, a point of light in the sky,
we can understand exactly what that star's made of? So like I said before, stars
have a chemical composition. And one of the longstanding research questions we
have is, where do the elements in the universe come from? And when I mean
elements, if I take this glass of water, it's got hydrogen and oxygen in it. The
question is, where is this hydrogen coming from? Where is this oxygen coming
from? And like I said, not all stars make the elements at the same time. As
Kirsten said, young stars are just making hydrogen into helium. They're not
making carbon and so on. So the question that Brian asks me is, how do we know?
So I spend all my day looking at starlight and turning it into rainbows. That's
my life, guys. It's beautiful. And the way I do this is I stare at a star, and
the starlight comes to me, and I put it through a prism. And that prism breaks
up this white light into the colors of the rainbow. That's what it does, right?
White light through a prism gets broken down into the colors of the rainbow. But
now imagine my star has helium or neon or argon or whatever the chemical element
is. When the photon from the core of the star is passing through this element,
some of the energy of the light particle is absorbed by that element. So what
happens is when I look at my rainbow, I either see dark lines because some of
the light has been absorbed by that particular element. What we can do, and this
is measured in laboratories and through atomic physics, we can tell the missing
lines to great precision where I know when a line is missing, I know which
element it represents. And in some cases, the line's not missing or the light
particle is energized. So the light can either be absorbed by the element or it
can be energized by the element. And that's going to show up in my spectra as
what I call an absorption line or an emission line. So a beautiful rainbow is
going to be a bright line or a dark line. It's simple. It's so cool with
studying stars like that. Like we're getting information not from the light that
they emit, but from the light they don't emit. That's right. So basically
elements have a chemical fingerprint just like you and I. Very, very unique. I
just got this image of you, like people walking past your lab and the doors
open, it's just rainbows flying out of the lab. Oh, she's exploded in my little
pony again. It's either astronomy or it's the lucky charms factory. Yeah,
exactly. I can't be sure which. We should round up there, I think, Russ. There's
just one final question I wanted to ask. So I know you're just finishing your
PhD. So what is the big question that you would hope to answer? The ultimate
question is, why are we here? And to answer that is answering the question of
where are the elements in the galaxy? And to do that, we study the stars. And we
can study very specific types of stars that allow us to do that really, really
well. That's those red clump stars. But the problem with red clump stars, they
look very similar to their red giant branch imposters. We can't use those as
effectively to map the galaxy. So what I'm trying to do is to distinguish one
from the other using spectra, using spectroscopy. So your why are we here is a
kind of geographical question, basically. Why are we here? Why are we in this
part of a galaxy, rather than the bigger philosophical question of why are we
here? I tend to digest the first one better than the last one. Yeah, yeah. I'd
say you've got a lot more chance of success, to be quite honest. Philosophy is
moving slower than we might have hoped. Tameka, what about for you? What is the
big question you would like to hope that we can understand within your working
life? I think it's really understanding how galaxies evolve with time through
the basic building blocks, which are stars. So the big question is really trying
to understand the chemical composition of the universe, starting from the basic
building blocks, stars. And we don't know a lot of it because of the diversity.
It may seem like, well, yeah, we know these stars make carbon. But there's so
many internal complexities. If you take a galaxy and you map the chemical
composition of it, it's not going to be a straight line for every element. And
even the same group of stars, some of them will make carbon or some element. And
some of them will decide, nah, I'm not going to show up today. And I'm not going
to make this element. And the question is why? Yeah, I think it's such a
wonderful picture that a galaxy, this thing, as you said, 100,000 light years
across, is a big chemistry set. Yes, it is in a way that we don't quite
understand. We understand it by and large. But the intricacies of it is what we
don't understand. See that's the worrying thing, though. Because anyone here
who, if they were a kid, was given a chemistry set, what was the first thing he
did? How do I make everything explode? Which means that we might not be the
people who should be responsible for the chemistry set. I think there should be
some other. Oh, don't worry. Did you want to know the question? I was about to
say Ross. Has your big question changed from what you've heard tonight? No, I'm
still the same. I'm still working on my big question from my research is, if you
were racing centaurs, would you just have them racing normally? Or would you
have miniature jockeys on them with horses heads? No, wherever you got to so
far. To be honest with you, I'm finding it hard to source the centaurs. I'm
using regular horses with probably much of human heads. So you're hoping this
will be an observational science and not just theoretically? Yes, to be honest.
When I do it theoretically, the people at the bus stop move away quickly. To be
honest, I remember when you had two minotaurs on a unicycle. That was disaster
enough, wasn't it? They won't fund my research anymore. The people at the
center. The centaur center? The centaur center. Is that the central centaur
center? That's right, yes. What would you... No, no, no, Brian, don't go further
with this. No, I'm intrigued now. Now we've got two... If one of the two
possible outcomes you described were shown to be... Which one would you hope
would turn out to be the correct answer? Well, I would hope... I would hope... I
mean, obviously, you've got to decide, do you put a jockey's hat on the human
head of the centaur? Yeah. You know, technically, they've got a horse's body,
but human head. So that's the first thing. But that's not an observational
question. You choose that. Do you choose or do they choose? They've got a human
brain, yet a horse's body. Right. Yeah. To be honest, I was even more excited
when you got that cyclops to play darts. The monocular nature of it really does
change its ability, doesn't it? Yeah, it's ready to... Stop deflecting him. I
think Brian is the greatest popular scientist because a lot of people who are
very intelligent would go, shut up, Ross. I'm just trying to pin it down. What
you have to understand about science is it's just loose. We don't know all the
answers. It's okay, Ross. What you need to say here is that's beyond the scope
of this research. Exactly. Then move on. Well, anyway, we'll be following up on
Ross's centaur centre research in the next series. We won't. We're going to ask
our audience a question as well. What is the most improbable thing you would
like to be discovered deep in the universe? Anita says a strawberry seen to a
cat, knock, knock, and the cat replying, open the bloody box and find out.
Lizzie wants a cocktail bar with hot aliens. Is there one of those in Sydney? I
think that's a cocktail. Can I have two hot aliens? Space cats with laser eyes.
You know when your eyesight is not very good and you have the laser put in to
fix the eye, would that make the cat's eyes better? If they had lasers coming
out of the eyes, would it make the eyes better or worse? You said that so much
like an optician. Better or worse. Can I ask you again, Puss in Boots? Better or
worse. Laser cat, whoo, better or worse. John said dark side of the moon on the
dark side of the moon. Took me a while. He wants to find the Pink Floyd album on
the dark side of the moon. I keep meaning to ask you this as well. What happens
if you put a werewolf on the moon? The dark side of the moon isn't dark. No, no,
no, he's not talking about that. If it's on the dark side of the moon, it will
be perpetually human. If it's on the other side of the moon, it will be a
perpetual lycanthrope. But it wouldn't be seeing the moon. It would be seeing
the sunlight. No, no, no, it doesn't matter. The moon is always going to be
full, though, isn't it? But it is because you're going to be on the moon. Can
you explain to him what he's saying? Well, no, no, can I just tell you, just so
you know, even though it's night, I'm still able to move around and see things.
No, but I'm just saying that it's not night all the time on the dark side of the
moon. No, no, but it doesn't have to be night to be a werewolf. God, you don't
know anything about werewolves. Yet another enormous gap in your knowledge. No,
but there's no difference. Isn't it, you said it was on the dark side of the
moon, it'd be one thing, and on the light side of the moon, it'd be the other
thing, but it's not because there's no difference to the werewolf. I'm just
saying, tomorrow, you're going to be in your lab, all rainbows flying around.
You're not going to be able to concentrate on your important work. You'll be
thinking about the moon. Anyway, so thank you very much to everyone. Next week,
our guests include four humans and two spiders. We have our final show that
we're recording in Australia, and we have an orb web spider and a huntsman, both
of which you're very keen on, aren't you, Brian? I don't like spiders. Love
them. Absolutely love a spider. I'm so looking forward to having the spiders on,
because we had an episode once with a crow, and you were really annoyed by the
crow, weren't you? Because the crow kept walking around and giving you a look
that showed that it possibly was more intelligent than you, because it had a
little puzzle with this box that had to pull strings, and it did it, and you
couldn't. Yeah, well, if the spider does that, I'm going to be extremely
worried. My top tip on the spiders, right, because I live in the countryside and
there's a lot of big ones around, and a lot of people, they try and catch the
spiders and flick them out. But when you zoom in on a spider, you know how
they've got the hair, they're quite hairy creature spiders, get a bit of hair
gel or hairspray, whoosh, doesn't kill them, but it sets them. Right. LAUGHTER
You stick them up, put them outside, rain's on them, ooh, I'm off. LAUGHTER
That's it. There you go. With that, goodnight. With your rockabilly spiders.
Thank you very much, everyone. Bye-bye. APPLAUSE CHEERING THEME SONG ♪ In the
Infinite Monkey Cage... ♪ Turn that nice again. The Infinite Monkey Cage was
presented by Brian Cox and Robin Ince. The producer was Caroline Steele, and
it's a BBC Studios production. And all the episodes in this series are available
now on BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4, here's Victoria Gill with this week's BBC
Inside Science. The impacts of climate change on this vast frozen continent are
coming to light like never before, thanks to satellite imaging, submarine
sensor-laden robots and just scientists with their very insulated boots on the
ground. In the last week, it was announced that there's now less sea ice
surrounding the Antarctic continent than at any time since the 1970s, a global
warming low. And what happens in Antarctica doesn't stay in Antarctica. The vast
white surface of sea ice reflects the sun's rays back into space. And as sea ice
expands and contracts, it drives ocean currents that regulate our whole climate
system. It even drives the formation of storms. And the biggest source of
uncertainty about future sea level rise, something that will affect all of us,
is just how much of the continent's vast landlocked ice sheet will actually
melt. It's a huge, important and complicated climate puzzle. So luckily, I have
an excellent climate scientist here with me to help unpick it. Dr Tamsin Edwards
is an expert in modelling climate change, particularly for ice sheets and
glaciers. She also co-presents Radio 4's 39 Ways to Save the Planet. Tamsin,
thank you very much for joining us. Thanks for having me. So I'm going to get
right into mine your expertise. We've talked about sea ice, we've talked about
glaciers and ice sheets, land ice and sea ice, quite different things. What's
the fundamental difference? The main thing really is that we have this floating
ice on the surface of the oceans. That's the sea ice. So when that melts,
because it's floating, it basically doesn't really contribute to sea level rise.
But it is important, as you said at the top of the programme, for things like
reflecting the sun's rays away and keeping the planet a bit cooler up and down
at the poles. And then the land ice is the ice that's on the land. So that's
what we often call the ice caps. Scientists will call them ice sheets for
Greenland and Antarctica, the really huge ice caps. And then the glaciers in the
mountains. And those are the ones that because they're not touching the water
and floating in it already, when they melt due to climate change, they
contribute to sea level rise. But what's happening with that glacier ice, with
that landlocked ice? Because we had some new information about Thwaites Glacier
in West Antarctica just in the last week, didn't we, about its sensitivity to
the temperature of the sea. You know, what new clues are we getting there?
That's right. Antarctica's a really unique and special place in all kinds of
ways. If we think about the glaciers around the world in the mountains and the
Greenland ice sheet up at the top of the planet, those sitting on land, they
kind of are mostly affected by the temperatures of the air. But Antarctica, a
lot of it is sitting on bedrock that is underwater. So a lot of that ice is
touching the oceans and therefore it's sensitive not only to what the air
temperatures are, but the oceans as well. It isn't just a case actually of, you
know, you warm the planet with the greenhouse gases as we are doing and the air
temperature goes up and the ocean temperature goes up. There's all kinds of
extra complications because of how the water currents are circulating around and
the saltiness of the water and even the ozone layer, the hole in the ozone layer
kind of contributes to the complexity. So it's a unique place but incredibly
complicated to understand. Is it right that we're kind of seeing a more linear,
sort of parallel climate change response in the Arctic? We're seeing it warming,
you know, even faster than we previously thought. But the response to climate
change in Antarctica has been a little strange and different and varied. That's
right. What we worry about is once you start to go down these pathways of change
in Antarctica, those regions can potentially undergo a kind of irreversible
change. We sort of set the ball rolling down the hill and those glaciers
actually just keep melting and keep losing ice into the oceans and it becomes
very hard to stop over hundreds or thousands of years. So that's the thing we're
really worried about. We don't quite know how far down that path of setting that
off we are, but if we do, the consequences for sea level rise and coastlines
around the world are very, very serious. Yeah. And one of the people who is
working on the ground in Antarctica, in that frozen, isolated continent, is
British Antarctic Survey Scientist Nadia Frontier, who is a marine biologist at
Rothera Research Station, has the job of diving in the extremely cold Antarctic
waters to study the effect of climate change on marine life there. Nadia sends
us this audio snippet from a day working at Rothera. Today is Tuesday morning
and the sun is shining high in the sky and reflecting off the snow like
beautiful diamond particles. You can hear the sound of it crunching under our
feet. I'm helping with conducting some long-term monitoring of the South Polar
Skewer population, which is an oceanic seabird. So they're flying above us just
over a beautiful ocean expanse of brash ice. So that's lots of bits of broken up
either glacial ice or bits of sea ice. But it's just littering the water and
giving this gorgeous effect of a mosaic. And you can hear we've got the call of
an adult skewer, which we are slowly approaching. So the beautiful thing about
being a marine biologist in Antarctica is that you have the opportunity to work
and help out on quite a variety of different research projects. So what I'm
doing right now is something more terrestrial, so that's land-based in helping
with this seabird monitoring. But as a marine biologist here, my main aim is to
study the benthic community, and that's everything that lives on the seafloor,
ranging from seaweed to invertebrates such as sea cucumbers and anemones. And
what I really love about being in a small research station is that you have the
opportunity to help out with so many different projects. And it just brings a
beautiful collaboration, an atmosphere that is so crucial for Antarctic science.
So on our island, Adelaide Island, we are overlooking the West Antarctic
Peninsula, and that is to the south of us, a beautiful chain of mountains, but
also quite frustrating because we can't actually get there. We are separated by
the Le Beuf Fjord system, which is probably about five kilometres wide. So we
are detached from the mainland, but in this fjord, we can see a humpback whale
that is logging. So logging is a behaviour that whales adopt when they are
resting at the surface. We get quite a lot of humpback whales here, and the
polar summer starts from November to about February, and it's really common to
have at least five humpback whale sightings a day. And now we have just walked
down from the Antarctic Specially Protected Area onto a rocky beach. So you
should be able to hear the sound of waves breaking against small fragments of
icebergs. We are watching a Weddell seal swim in the water with its head up
against the backdrop of absolutely huge, striking tabular icebergs, which are
probably about 10 metres high. There's also a collection of Adelie penguins on
the beach, and one of them is trying to swim in the snow. And behind us, we've
got a proud fur seal that is sitting on a rock. I do feel really lucky being a
researcher here in Antarctica, because we have the opportunity to see habitats
that first not many people do see, and that are just absolutely incredible and
fragile. And it just drives this fire in me that the importance of protecting
marine ecosystems is so great. And because there are so few Antarctic
researchers, the data we collect and the projects that we do have even more of a
weight. Oh, and we've just seen a humpback whale. A humpback whale logging again
at the surface. That was Nadia Frontier in Antarctica. So, Tamzin, why is it
important? We've had so much technological advance in our efforts to study
Antarctica, but why is it really important to have people working on the ground
in research bases there? It's really important. Sadly, I've never been myself.
Have you not? That was going to be my next question. All my work is really in
the kind of maths and computer modelling end of things. So sadly, I've never
been and I don't know if I ever will. I think it's important, partly because I
don't know if automated technologies could ever cover all of the incredible
complexity of what the scientists are doing. I mean, they might drill for an ice
core and then take it up and analyse it immediately in a laboratory in a tent in
the field, basically. And robots and technology and so forth, obviously, break
in those incredibly harsh conditions. I remember the project, the Lake Ellsworth
campaign. I think it was their hot water boilers that they used to melt down
water to drill into the ice with hot water. I think they kept breaking. They ran
out of fuel. You know, this is tough stuff. You know, people are hardy and often
technology can let us down because of the incredible conditions. I think also
just scientists need to see these places personally. You know, that's why I'd
love to go one day. You want to see really the details. What are the crevasses
you see in those ice shelves that you're trying to understand in your computer
model? What do those lakes of meltwater look like over the ice shelves that
might widen those crevasses and lead to that ice shelf breaking up? If you're
studying, you know, biology, what are those penguins doing? You know, you need
to be there, right? You can't just do it with satellites or robots. We need to
see this place to really understand the uniqueness of the environment, the way
that it doesn't look like anywhere else. It's almost like its own planet, isn't
it? To really get that sense of wanting to take care of the place and why it's
so important to preserve it and keep it pristine. Absolutely. What do you think
people don't realise about it? I was reading about the ocean current circulation
and how that impacts the temperatures in the UK and makes the UK kind of
relatively warmer than places at similar latitudes. The idea of Antarctica
making the UK a bit warmer seems very strange and counterintuitive. What have
you come across in your work that you think maybe people up in northern Europe
don't realise about the direct impact of Antarctica on our own climate, our
weather, our lives? It's a great question. The whole world is connected.
Antarctica is affected by climate change. The ice that melts from the Antarctic
ice sheet actually causes more sea level rise around the north part of the
planet, the North Pole, than near the south, which is an extraordinary,
completely opposite thing to what we think. That's basically because of an
effect of gravity. So when you lose ice from Antarctica, the water around it
doesn't have such a strong gravitational attraction. So it sinks locally, close
to Antarctica, when you lose ice from Antarctica. So that water then gets
distributed around the global oceans and causes more sea level rise in the UK
than off the coastline of Antarctica, which is extraordinary and awful thing
that people would really hear about. Thank you, Tamsin. We'll be back with you.
But now Antarctica is absolutely vast as well, more than 13 million square
kilometres, 50 times the size of the UK. The only way that we can get a view of
the extent of the sea ice that surrounds it and the whole of the continent is
from space. Gathering and interpreting all that satellite data is something that
our next guest, Dr Rachel Tilling from the Cryospheric Sciences Lab at NASA's
Goddard Space Flight Centre, knows all about. We can use the satellite data to
give us the area of the sea ice, both in the Arctic up north and in the
Antarctic down south. Every year we see these news articles about the Arctic and
record minimum lows, but we don't often see that in the Antarctic because it's a
very different region. This year we are seeing a record low area in Antarctic
sea ice extent. It's a very newsworthy result that we're seeing. It's not just
about the extent, is it? It's about the thickness. If you're looking at the
changes in the ice overall, can you get that with satellites too? I say it's all
about the thickness. That's what I do most days. Because we have this
incredible, and it is an incredible, long-term data set of sea ice extent in the
polar regions. But that just gives us a two-dimensional picture. It tells us the
area of the ice. To really know how the ice is changing long-term, we need to be
able to measure the thickness of the ice as well, which gives us the volume and
a much better idea of how much loss of ice we're seeing. I can kind of logically
see, taking a picture from space, you've got this measure of the area. How do
you go into the thickness with satellite measurements? It's not a direct
measurement. We use what we call an altimeter satellite. That's a satellite that
sends out a signal, either radar or laser, and reflects from a surface and tells
you the height of that surface. In sea ice-covered regions, it can tell you the
height of the ice surface, but it also tells you the height of the ocean surface
between these big blocks of sea ice. You can difference those to know the
freeboard. The freeboard is just the height of the ice above the ocean. Then we
just apply a simple equation to transfer that to sea ice thickness. What
challenges does Antarctica present for you as a scientist in particular? It is
much more challenging, because even though we're using the same theory, and it
would be very fair to assume that what happens in the Arctic also happens in the
Antarctic. They're both big, cold places. The sea ice in Antarctica is actually
very different, because if you think of the geography of those two regions, the
Arctic is an ocean that's very much protected by land, pretty much all around,
whereas the Antarctic is a landmass surrounded by ocean. You get a lot more
snowfall, because you've got a lot more evaporation coming off the ocean,
surrounding the ice. That snow cover is what really gives us the problem. It's
incredibly thick. It's not just a nice uniform depth of snow. You get a lot of
layers, a lot of deformation. We really need to understand exactly where our
instruments are reflecting from, because we can't just assume that it's
reflecting from the ice surface, for example, because it may be reflecting from
somewhere in that very complex snowpack. At present, we don't have the data on
ground to help us say for sure where the radar signal is coming from. Right. And
such a vast continent, such a big place as well with all those layers. The idea
that snow is a problem in Antarctica is, I guess, quite an intuitive problem.
But how variable and how complicated and thick can those layers of snow that are
muddying your signal be? The snow can be incredibly thick. I've been down to
Antarctica in the Weddell Sea, which is a little sea near the Antarctic
Peninsula. And I have spent a good day digging through snow pits on Antarctic
sea ice. And I've dug down by two meters. I've stood in the snow pit. It's been
towering above my head and I still haven't hit the ice surface yet. So this is
the thing that really complicates our satellite returns. You dig through a snow
pit this deep and there's so many different layers, so many places the radar
signal could be reflecting from. And we have something that's hundreds of
kilometers up in space. And we're trying to figure out where in the snow we're
actually getting a return from. I spend a lot of my life trying to figure that
out. So apart from sending Rachel to Antarctica to dig, to see where the snow
ends and the ice starts, how are you getting around that technically? We're also
doing a lot of airborne campaigns. So the European Space Agency were just down
in Antarctica flying over the continent, but also over the sea ice and NASA, we
were up in the Arctic flying over Arctic sea ice. And we essentially put mini
versions of the instruments that we have on satellites on these planes, whether
that's a radar or a laser, and fly over and along satellite tracks to get
measurements, not just from the satellite, but from these smaller airborne
instruments that can give us a better idea of what's actually going on in the
snowpack. That was Rachel Tilling. Now, Tamzin, Rachel and her team are looking
to fill in some of the gaps in our knowledge with this satellite technology.
Those direct measures all feed into these models that your focus is on refining
so that we can get the very best models to show us what is happening to the
global climate system. How good are those models proving to be? And what is your
work focusing on to make them even more accurate and a more accurate forecast of
what we're facing? They are really good. They've given us the big picture on
global warming for many years now. I mean, my particular interest actually is
trying to put error bars on those predictions. So you don't just run your
computer model once into the future. You run it many times with slightly
different kind of settings to see what are the whole range of plausible futures.
What's the biggest climate change and the smallest climate change that we might
see? What's the biggest sea level rise and the smallest? And that's kind of an
art in itself. It's a science. It's a mathematical field to understand that
uncertainty in the future. And then again, the next stage is we don't just run
those computer models and say, oh, well, we'll just believe them and that's what
it is. They're obviously based on physics and lots of chemistry and biology and
geology and all this science that we've gathered, but we also test them. So we
run them, for example, to reproduce the last several decades of change around
Antarctica. And then we compare that with the data that we've got from
satellites from the 1970s or the 1990s, sometimes a little bit further back,
certainly further back. We have lots of data around the planet from ships,
voyages and weather stations and all sorts. And we test them when we say, well,
how well did that climate model do in the past? When we try to predict the past,
if you like, and we kind of score them and we only use the best versions of the
models to really found out our predictions for the future. Right. And the more
data, the better that goes into testing and kind of feeding into those models, I
suppose. Absolutely. These are complex places. But I think one thing I'd maybe
like to say is that we still need to understand climate change to adapt. We know
that we're going to keep having more climate change in the future because it's
going to be, you know, hard to turn around our emissions very quickly. So we
need to adapt to sea level rise. The seas are going to keep rising even if we
cut emissions very quickly. We are still going to get changes in our weather for
sort of years to decades. And we need to understand what the future will look
like, as well as cutting the emissions to keep to the Paris Agreement targets
and so forth, net zero pledges and things. So it's no longer about sort of
trying to work out the what if the emissions were very high or very low, because
as a planet, we're aiming for low emissions. But it's also about what climate
change is still in the pipeline, because we're not going to be able to stop it
immediately, because we're still going to be emitting. It's going to take some
time to turn the ship around. Yeah, yeah. The detail will show us what sort of a
world we'll actually be living in in the near term. Right. Exactly. Thank you,
Tamzin. And finally, with all of that data, we are trying to make sense of
what's happening in Antarctica. But one polar researcher and sound artist has
taken a very different approach to understanding the vast frozen continent. He's
been using recordings captured over years with floating microphones. His name's
Dr. Garent Rees-Whitaker, and he's composed a novel sonic take on how human
activity is affecting life in the cold polar seas. Our climate reporter Georgina
Ranard has been listening. Hello to you, wherever you are in the world. What you
are about to hear is something that has never been heard before. Scientists have
conducted the world's first interview with a humpback whale community from the
Arctic. In this extract from the conversation, the whales discuss the impact
that industrial-scale seismic air gun oil and gas surveys has had on them and
their homes. The next voices you will hear will be those of the whales. The main
bombing was continuously in the same area. The highway had been hit there badly
with a bomb, which I found I had to divert again. So frightening. And when they
were passing, and I heard it come down, and their home got a direct hit. So what
you've listened to is a piece I created called First Contact. I'm from Swansea,
South Wales, which during the Second World War was completely flattened really
by the bombs. And so I thought, OK, what can I do? Use the voices of the people
talking about the devastation of bombing in Swansea as if it was the voices of
the whales talking about the devastation of the impact on air guns having on
them. This is Dr. Garent Rees-Whitaker. He's taken underwater sounds recorded in
the Arctic and Antarctic and turned these little heard noises into immersive
compositions about these places we don't often think about. For this one, he
chose the sound of air guns blasted at sea. They're essentially ships that go
back and forth for two main purposes. One is to look for oil and gas, and then
the other is for scientific surveys. So even scientists use these ships. And
what they do, they emit this massive impulse of air into the ocean to read
what's going on underneath. And so immediately when I heard it, it sounded like
a war on the environment, a war on the ocean. This noise pollution is disrupting
marine life. Studies are finding it causes a loss of hearing sensitivity,
physical injury, and increased stress to mammals like whales. Some even stop
eating. Whales use sound over long distances to communicate. But as scientists
record higher levels of human-made noise in the oceans, they're finding that
animal behaviour is being disturbed. Due to things like, for example, the winter
ice melting, meaning in the Arctic, for example, shipping lanes are increasing,
the oceans are actually getting louder and we are having a detrimental impact.
Garent, I know you've collected quite a few sounds, but how can they actually
help us tackle climate change? Well, I'll tell you what, Georgina, how about we
listen to some of them first? For example, this is the Ross seal. This is the
Weddell seal. And this next sound is a really interesting one. It's the singing
ice. So singing ice basically happens when the ice contracts and expands due to
temperature rising. And it creates this noise as the movement of the ice shifts.
So we started there with almost otherworldly sounds of animals, or that seal
call that sounded like a dance beat. But the ones I found really powerful are
the sounds you might associate with climate change. As we know, scientific
papers are telling us that the Arctic is warming four times faster than other
parts of the world. And when I hear the crunching and thunderous cracking, I can
really visualise the ice breaking and falling into the water. I think it's
really important when we talk about these issues, for things we can never really
understand, is using things like storytelling and dystopian narratives to put
ourselves in that position, to not only help us to try to think how would it
make us feel, but also it kind of hopefully draws the audience in as well and
puts them in the shoes of the whales. Obviously whales don't wear shoes, but
puts in the mindset at least for them to start thinking about, you know, how can
we imagine the impact of what's going on. That was Georgina Ranard and some very
unusual polar sounds there. Tamzin, what do you think, you know, you deal in the
hard data and getting that hard data into a form where we can, you know, really
use it to work out how the world is changing. What do you think of taking that
very different approach to, you know, heard some sounds and treatments of sounds
that I've certainly never heard before? It's incredibly important. I absolutely
place art around science and understanding the world very, very highly. I come
from a family that has a lot of artists in, and we need beauty, we need story,
we need imagination to really fully understand this planet. We've got some
amazing schemes where poets and artists can go to the polar regions. There are
kind of various expeditions that they can go on, come back and, you know, talk
about these places in ways that move us, that might move us to protect them,
that move us to understand them better, to think about the bigger picture, to
think about the long-term future, to think about the long-term past. One of my
favourite films, probably my favourite film ever is Werner Herzog's Encounters
at the End of the World. Oh, fabulous. I think he did go on one of these
expeditions funded for artists to go. Yeah. And he filmed, talking about why
scientists need to go, you know, why we need to see scientists there, he went
and filmed all these scientists in Antarctica. And it's just the most glorious
film. It's not a documentary. This is a kind of common misunderstanding, that
it's a documentary about Antarctica. And then I think some people get very cross
when they think it's not, doesn't stick to documentary style, shall we say. I've
spoken to a couple of Antarctic researchers who weren't a fan of the sort of
slightly eccentric way in which some of the researchers may have come across in
that film. I also think that's a wonderful film and a kind of, an interesting
perspective on Antarctica and on that sort of remote field research that you
don't normally get. I suppose that's what this, you know, sound artist is going
for as well, a totally different point of view. Absolutely. The point is, it's
not about documenting the kind of banal detail of the day to day. It's about
finding the deeper truth. You know, it's about constructing the story of
Antarctica and what it feels like to be there or what it means for humanity to
be there, to be trying to understand it. So it's not about, let's just make a
video diary. Anyone can make a video diary. What you need is an artist to reveal
that deeper truth about a place, about our place in Antarctica. Well, Tamzin
Edwards, you have definitely constructed the story of Antarctica very
beautifully for us today. I really appreciate your time. Thank you very much for
joining us. My pleasure. Thank you so much. Well, that is all we have time for
this week. Inside Science is produced in collaboration with The Open University
and we will be emerging from the frozen south to be back with you next week. BBC
Inside Science was presented by Victoria Gill and produced by Emily Burt.
Continuing our celebration of the centenary of BBC radio drama... The huntsman
now purposefully directed his footsteps...analysing the most groundbreaking
plays from the vast drama archive. It's intensely physical, this room. What? He
just took your wallet, sir! You can go to different places and tell the stories
from different points of view. Dramatic beats with me, Michael Simmons-Roberts.
Everything in British storytelling, film, television, owes so much to radio
drama. On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds on Saturday night at 8.