TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Life in Ukraine and the view from Russia. This is the BBC World Service, the
world's radio station. Fifty years after the last American combat troops left
Vietnam, some of the veterans now in their 70s have returned to live here. This
is their story. Our job was, they call it search and destroy. It's a wound on
your soul. A shame wound on your soul. You're ashamed of what you've seen and
what you did. 2002 was my first return to Vietnam. And I was expecting people to
hate me. People welcomed me back like I had just left the day before. And they
wanted to know what took you so long, getting back. I say this is the only thing
that makes sense, me living in Vietnam. It's the only thing. There's no place
like NAMM with me now farm, after the news on BBC World Service. Hello, I'm
David Harper with the BBC News. Votes are being counted in Nigeria's most
competitive presidential election in decades. It's thought to be a tight race
between three frontrunners trying to succeed. President Mohammedu Buhari, who's
stepping down after service of the maximum two terms. The voting process was
largely peaceful, but there were severe delays and reports of violence. Mayeni
Jones reports from Lagos. Frustration and anger. Many Nigerians want to take
part in this election, but have been disappointed by the lack of organisation.
Gang violence and threats by militant Islamists have made voting difficult in
some regions. In Lagos, despite the lack of organisation, voters told us more
people showed up than in the last elections. Having a third candidate for the
first time is an encouraging sign in a region where democracy feels under
threat. But whoever wins will have to deal with a struggling economy, high youth
unemployment and widespread insecurity. Ukrainian media say a senior general has
visited troops near Bakhmut, which has been the focus of months of intense
onslaught by the Russian military and Wagner mercenaries. General Alexander
Siyosky's trip to the eastern city, much of which has been reduced to rubble,
coincided with reports of advances in the area by Moscow's forces. In his
nightly address, President Volodymy Zelensky praised the heroism of Ukrainian
soldiers in the eastern region. I'm thankful for all those who are bravely
defending our positions in the Donbas, destroying the enemy and fighting for a
powerful result. The result in the east is necessary for us to have results in
the rest of the country. Meanwhile, the European Union has announced additional
sanctions against the Russian-based Wagner Group for what it says are human
rights abuses in several African countries. The mercenary organisation was
already sanctioned by the EU in 2021. Israel's national security minister has
condemned protesters opposed to the government's planned legal reforms as
anarchists. The minister, Itamar Ben Gevir, said the police should show zero
tolerance. The proposed changes would allow the government to appoint Supreme
Court judges and would limit the court's power. Big crowds have been taking part
in protests in towns and cities across Israel for the eighth consecutive week,
as Yousaf Taha reports. Organisers say that around 300,000 people took part in
Saturday's rallies, making them the largest yet. In Tel Aviv, a major road
junction was blocked by tens of thousands of demonstrators who waved Israeli
flags. The leader of the opposition Labour Party, Mirabh Mikhali, told the rally
in Rohevoat that the protests would not stop until the government stopped
threatening democracy. The former Prime Minister Ehud Barak said Israel was
facing a swears crisis since the modern state was created. World news from the
BBC. A US Navy submarine has docked in the South Korea naval port of Busan.
Unusually, the arrival of the nuclear-powered USS Springfield was announced on
social media. Correspondents say the presence of the submarine is probably
intended to serve as a warning to North Korea, which has repeatedly carried out
weapons tests in recent months, raising tension on the peninsula. Many
newspapers in the United States have dropped the long-running Dilbert cartoon
strip after a racist outburst by its creator. Speaking on his YouTube channel,
Scott Adams described black Americans as a hate group and said white people
should get the hell away from them. The UK and the European Union are set to be
on the brink of finalising a new deal on post-Brexit trading rules for Northern
Ireland. The current protocol means Northern Ireland still follows some EU laws
and goods arriving from the British mainland are subject to checks. It's led to
one of the main political parties blocking the operation of Belfast's power-
sharing assembly. Judges at one of Europe's leading film festivals, the
Berlinale, have taken the unusual step of awarding the top prize to a
documentary. The winner was on the adamant, a French film about a floating
daycare centre for people suffering from mental illness. It was directed by
Nicholas Fillybert. In this film, I tried to reverse the image that we always
have of mad people so discriminating, so stigmatising. I wanted us to be able,
if not to identify with them, at least recognise what units us beyond our
differences. Something like a common humanity. In another surprise, the Berlin
Festival's award for Best Leading Actor went to its youngest ever winner, eight-
year-old Sophia Otero. She plays a transgender child in the film 20,000 Species
of Bees. BBC News. This whole area here had what we call hooches. And hooches
were the places where we slept. And the whole hill down was hooches. 50 years
ago, on the 29th of March, the last American combat troops left South Vietnam.
Helicopters would be buzzing right in front of our face, right over Haí Ván
Pass, which is back here. Today, a small group of US veterans, now in their 70s,
have returned to Lip here permanently. Looking out there is the city of Da Nang,
right there over the ridge. Matthew Keenan is one of the veterans. I'm probably
less than a kilometre to the right. It's your home. Right. That's where I live
now. Yes. I'm Na Pham, and this is no place like NAMM on BBC World Service. The
jet cong appeared to be in every alleyway. The sniper fire is still coming.
These buildings are out in the office of the water. It's across the street from
the... The conflict began in 1955 and lasted for almost 20 years as the
Communist government of the North battled against the South, officially named
the Republic of Vietnam. Whatever result is written into history, it will be
written in blood. The United States was South Vietnam's main ally. And American
combat troops were involved in the conflict from 1965 until 1973. Oh, last night
they ambushed a group of Americans this morning, wounded one, treated him, and
sent them back to a marine camp up the road here with a message. If you want
your bodies and the village back, you'll have to come and get them. I kind of
explain it when you're a little kid, you've got a monster under the bed. I had
to look under the bed. And the monster wasn't there. I say this is the only
thing that makes sense, me living in Vietnam. It's the only thing. Over the next
hour, we're going to meet some of the American veterans who live here, find out
why they choose to retire in Vietnam, and how the legacy of the war is still
impacting the Vietnamese people 50 years on. But first, let's hear some of their
experiences from 50 years ago that are still so vivid in their memories. Okay,
I'm Bill Ervin. I served with the Marine Corps in Vietnam through most of 1969.
I was infantry, I was a machine gunner. I've been living here in Vietnam now
since 2008, kind of on and off. Bill is a retired wildlife photographer and poet
from Boulder, Colorado. He lives in the quiet neighborhood of Da Nang in central
Vietnam, the country's third largest city. During the war, it was an important
base for the US military. I would have probably ended up being drafted, but I
did enlist. I enlisted on my 19th birthday. I needed something to do that would
make me more proud of myself, give me some kind of meaning, pretty much selfish
reasons at first. But then I still believed in the war at that time. I believe
that we were over here trying to help the Vietnamese people. Well, like Bob
Dylan says, God was on our side. Hoi Anh is a quaint historic town, about 45
minutes drive from Da Nang, and home to US veteran Manus Campbell. The early
days of this town, it was on the silk route. So the boats would come here and
trade. And eventually the boats got too big to come into the harbor. They went
to Da Nang. So this became a sleepy village until the tourists found it. During
COVID, these were the only businesses that survived these coffee shops on the
sidewalk. Red chairs and red tables. During the war, he was a Marine, fighting
in the northernmost region of South Vietnam, closed to the DMZ. He was the
demilitarized zone, separated the north from the south. And on a clear day, you
could look across and see the North Vietnamese soldiers in their daily life. A
high school swimming champion from New Jersey, Manus had just turned 19. I was
the support when they were building the airfield for this base. And so they
wanted to do this big sweep. And so we went out in the morning and I was the
first person of a couple of hundred men. So everyone follows my footsteps,
except my sergeant. And he stopped me to tell me something. He came up and he
tripped a 500-pound bomb that was dropped by the Americans and they set up as a
booby trap. And it didn't go off. If it went off, I wouldn't be here. I read him
the riot act. And lo and behold, three hours later, we had to cross the stream.
And there was a bamboo bridge. And he didn't follow in my footsteps and he
tripped the booby trap, which exploded and blew up the man behind me. Him and
two other men. It was really mountainous country where we were. The climate was
hot in May. And in October, it was cold and wet. And we all carried between 70
and 80 pounds on our backs. We had to have everything we needed to survive for
two or three weeks. They'd bring food out to us maybe every three or four days,
sometimes more ammunition if you needed it. But you always had to have enough
there with you to get through about anything you might encounter initially. We
were within a mile, mile and a half maybe, of North Vietnam. That was a big
infiltration area for the North to come down. Our job was, they call it search
and destroy. We would get out and we would hike two kilometers in a day, set up
camp, then run patrols out in a big circular pattern, checking out as much
ground as we could to find the enemy. The problem was is that they were really
good at hiding and dropping back. If they didn't want to engage with us, they
would just slip back into the forest and hide. And we could walk right past them
and never see them. And there would be other companies that were operating
fairly close to us, close enough to where they could come and help us if we got
into a big problem. My platoon was, we were all happy because we weren't going
on the mission. So we were really relaxed. And then we start hearing both AK-47,
AR-15, and then you hear the guy on the radio calling for help, calling for
backup. That's us. So we have to go. They were going down this lane in the
jungle. The Vietnamese were in the trees. They would tie themselves in the trees
and they would wait. And so it was a shooting gallery for them. So we came up to
the left and then we walked up the stream from the flank. We started taking
enemy fire and then all the enemy were gone or dead. And in that stream were all
these Marines dying, dead, arms and legs missing, crying for their mother,
screaming, I'm too young to die. I sat with another Marine. We sat on the side
of the stream and we just froze because what do you do? I never saw missing
limbs before. This is the first time I saw real war. The sounds, the smell, it
all stays with you. It's hell. Hell. So we get all the wounded to the
helicopter. The dead we put in bags. We couldn't get out. So that night we put
them in a circle, guarding them. And then the next day we carried them and put
them on the helicopter. And then we got on the helicopter and we left. The
nights were the worst when you forgot all your thirst and just worried about
staying alive. You were too old to cry, but you were too young to die. Hell,
pops just turned 25. When darkness set in and the bugs crawled your skin and the
jungle was full of men and the jungles made sounds of its own, you'd sit with
your fear of the strange things you'd hear. You were tired and wet and alone.
The hills far away would light up like the day. Ribbons of red would rain from
the sky. And the phantoms like dead would scream in overhead and zoom down for
another flyby. You shouldered your gun, but you wanted to run. As the shadows
advanced through the wire, the panic inside when the man by your side slumped
down in the muck in the mire. The battle raged on till a quarter till dawn. And
the smoke hung heavy and thick. You fired off your rounds at nothing but sounds.
And then you felt like you were going to get sick. And then it was done as fast
as it began. The enemy abandoned the fight. You wiped off your sweat and lit
your last cigarette and welcomed the first rays of light. When something really
bad happened in the war, no one talked. No one just said a word or was, oh, poor
Charlie. You were alone with what you felt, heard. That was the way we dealt
with it. They used the term post-traumatic stress disorder. It's not disorder.
It's a normal reaction to what you're seeing. And the better name is, it's a
wound on your soul. A shame wound on your soul. You're ashamed of what you've
seen and what you did. Every unit had guys. We had guys that were so messed up
because of what they did or what they didn't do. You either give them a little
bit, what we call the huss, a little bit of slack. You give them a job like mail
clerk that goes back and brings the mail in and out, something like that,
because you don't want to be out there in that kind of environment. With
somebody who's emotionally distracted. Some guys tried to get out. So they shot
themselves in the foot. They would pull the pin on a hand grenade. They'd be in
a hole and they'd throw it outside the hole and hold their hand up and get their
arm blown off. But, you know, it was a way of getting out or they wouldn't take
their malaria pills, hoping they'd get malaria and be too sick. I used to keep a
journal over there, kept it for a little over a month. And in that month, three
guys had shot themselves just to get out. Well, one guy stabbed himself in a leg
and two others shot themselves just to get out of the field. I had about four
weeks or five weeks left to go till I was going to go home. And at that point,
you start to count. You've already been counting your days for months, but it
really gets scary when you got a month ago and they say we're going on this big
mission to blow up the Ho Chi Minh Trail. The Ho Chi Minh Trail was a North
Vietnamese secret supply chain which ran along the length of the country through
the mountains and jungles and into parts of Laos and Cambodia. The hill I was on
was across from the hill that the artillery was on. And so we dig a hole and
then we make a camp and that night they came. What they do is they, the first
guy cuts the grass, the elephant grass, and they just come up the side of the
mountain. And the first couple of guys run and dive in the hole and blow
themselves up and blow everybody up in the hole. And now they're ready. So that
night we started with 42 men. The next morning there were 18 of us left. And I
always say that, you know, I should have died a hundred times, you know, inches
and seconds from my death. Hello, Chuck. Hi. Oh, hello. Hi. How are you today?
Chuck Searcy was one of the first US veterans to move to Vietnam over 25 years
ago when the country opened up to foreign investment and visitors, including
Americans. Today he lives in the country's capital, Hanoi, in the North. It's a
place I know well. I was born and grew up here. I was assigned to a military
intelligence unit in Saigon, 1967 and 16th. I was trained as an intelligence
analyst, which the Vietnamese and some Americans say only half jokingly, oh, so
that's the CIA. Well, it's not the CIA, although we had a loose affiliation with
the CIA and other intelligence organizations. But this was basic military
intelligence, plotting what we thought the Vietcong and the North Vietnamese
were likely to do next. Did you know a lot about the work before you arrived in
Saigon? I didn't have any information about Vietnam. My very simplistic and
graphic view of the situation, which is what all Americans have been told, was
that communist North Vietnam had invaded democratic South Vietnam and we should
protect South Vietnam. It was wrong what was happening. That was what we
believed, and it was only after I came to Vietnam and began to study Vietnam's
history and politics and their economic situations, agriculture, their attitudes
toward us and toward the Vietnamese authorities. So we learned a lot, and in the
process, ironically, most of us turned against the war. And we realized it was
wrong. It was self-defeating for us as Americans. We were going to lose. There's
no way we could win this. And in the meantime, it was destructive to the
Vietnamese people, and it was just it was wrong. And that conclusion was shared
by almost everybody in my unit. Was there a particular moment that caused you to
question the actions of the U.S. government? I think that Tet Offensive in 1968
was a turning point. According to some reports, there were about 1,000 Viet Cong
in this area of Saigon. The enemy very deceitfully has taken advantage of the
Tet truce in order to create maximum consternation within South Vietnam,
particularly in the populated areas. That's what I really saw for the first
time, the massive destruction that was going on throughout Vietnam that I had
not seen up to then. It's only a couple of months since General Westman was
saying that the Viet Cong dared not attack out of their sanctuaries. The
military assessments were all hopeful. A deeper cynicism will now prevail. After
three years of American military buildup, it seems no part of Vietnam is really
secure. It was also a turning point politically in the U.S. for the American
people, because it was when the Americans just finally said, wait a minute, what
the U.S. government's been telling us is simply not true. There's no light at
the end of the tunnel. So it changed U.S. thinking dramatically and began the
process of winding down and ending the war, which took a long time. But that was
the turning point. More protests back in the States were getting stronger. There
were a lot more draftees coming in. And plus, after you've been over here for a
while, you finally have to ask yourself, what the hell are we doing here? Why
are we doing this? What are we trying to achieve? You know, one of my poems is
about that, like, why are we here? We swept through green valleys. We humped
angry hills. We slashed through dark jungles and violated small vills. We hunted
in anger and we hunted in fear. We hunted for meaning to what brought us here.
With our tools of destruction, we did our jobs well. We laughed with our
brothers and we cried when they fell. We counted the bodies and we tallied the
score, but no one would tell us what the dying was for. On their return to the
USA, both Bill and Chuck joined the Vietnam Veterans Against the War movement. I
was convinced that if the American people were told the truth about Vietnam, and
if they could somehow share my experience and the experience of other GIs, other
American soldiers who'd been in Vietnam, that they also would realize the
futility of the war and the tragedy of the war and join in the effort to stop
the war. When we were flying home from Vietnam, I remember being on the airplane
and a bunch of us sitting there, we'd had a few beers before we got on the
plane, and we said, well, what are we going to tell people when they ask us what
it was like over there? And we were all trying to figure out, well, you know,
what to say and what not to say. When you got home, nobody asked. Yeah. And I
remember sitting down at dinner my second night home with my mom and dad, and my
dad said, well, what was it like over there? What did you do? And my mother
said, we don't want to talk about that. And that was about the extent of Vietnam
conversations at the house. All I know is she said, well, you changed over
there. And I said, mom, I was born over there. She didn't like that either. Even
without combat, the Marine Corps brings you to a depth of yourself that you
never knew existed. That changed my life. It made me who I am. And that's why I
say I was born here. Unfortunately, my parents saw me on TV one night, and they
were really upset because my father had been a veteran in World War II in the US
Army, and he was captured in the Battle of the Bulge. He was a POW under the
Germans. So he had a very different perspective on the war and was amazed that I
was opposed to the war. And he said to me, you're not patriotic. You're not
supporting our government. You're not a good American. He said, what happened to
you over there? Did they turn you into a communist? We didn't have any contact
for a couple of years. You know, I got back to work. I got married and had some
kids. But every day, Vietnam would be inside my mind. Little things would pop
up. And that's why I decided I'm going to go back to Vietnam. You know, you need
some validation. I did. That those places were there. Those events really
happened because they're so surreal when you try to put those together with what
real life is all about. I got my inspiration at a meditation retreat in Bogaya.
That trip was the first time I had traveled alone. And I heard a voice in my
head say, now you can go back to Vietnam. I started to research coming back.
1995, I came back on my own. And it was a real good experience for me. So I
started bringing veteran groups. You know, they're expecting to see burned out
tanks and bombed out buildings because that's what they remember. That's the
last they saw of it. Now you get here and you got fancy hotels with massage
parlors and Mexican restaurants and hamburgers. So it's pretty incredible. And
good barbecue too. Since moving to Vietnam, Manus has been devoted to
humanitarian projects and given financial sponsorship to many local students. I
believe it's my life work, you know, that I was saved from dying. That I got all
the help I needed to heal my heart and to forgive. And the hardest person to
forgive was myself. It makes me feel good. Join us after the news for part two
of No Place Like NAMM on BBC World Service. This is the BBC World Service with
the winner of the English as a Second Language prize for the International Radio
Playwriting Competition. My name is Aynoor Karim. I'm a writer from Kazakhstan
in my play. It's a funny story about a student who finds someone else's passport
and wants to give it back to its owner. I thought I'd better take it to the
police station myself. It's on my way. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. Show me the
passport. At first I felt a little bit like I was limited in the way how I can
express myself. But then I like it even more because you close your eyes and you
just need to imagine. Why isn't there nationality stated in the passport? Why do
you say he's not a kazakh? He is a kazakh, absolutely. I would be happy if
people just laugh and enjoy it. The man lost his passport. We must give it back.
What a face. The passport. Today at 12 GMT. Fifty years after the last American
combat troops left Vietnam, some of the veterans, now in their 70s, have
returned to live here. When I came back to Vietnam to begin with, I came back to
fight the war. The best thing that I found over here is the peace. I say this is
the only thing that makes sense, me living in Vietnam. It's the only thing.
There's no place like Nam with me now farm. After the news on BBC World Service.
BBC News with David Harper. Reports are being counted in Nigeria's most
competitive presidential election in decades. The process was chaotic but
largely peaceful. In some areas, people queued up into the night to vote. The
contest is a tight race between three front runners to replace President
Mohammed Ubuhari. Ukrainian media say a senior general has visited troops near
Bakhmout, which has been the focus of months-long offensive by Russian forces.
General Alexander Tsiolsky's trip to the eastern city comes amid reports of
Russian advances in the area. The European Union is bringing more sanctions
against the Russian mercenary group Wagner for serious human rights abuses in
Sudan, Mali and the Central African Republic. Large crowds have been taking part
in protests in towns and cities across Israel for the eighth consecutive week
against the government's planned legal reforms. International Security Minister
Itamar Ben Gevir described the protesters as anarchists. The US Navy submarine
has docked in the South Korean port of Busan. Unusually, the arrival of the
nuclear-powered USS Springfield was announced on social media. Correspondents
say the submarine is probably intended to serve as a warning to North Korea,
which has repeatedly carried out weapons tests in recent months. Many newspapers
in the United States have dropped the long-running Dilbert cartoon strip after a
racist outburst by its creator. Speaking on his YouTube channel, Scott Adams
described black Americans as a hate group. The French president, Emmanuel
Macron, has said that a long-delayed trade deal between the EU and a group of
four South American countries can't go ahead unless they follow European
environmental policies. French farmers fear competition from the Mercosur
countries if they are not subject to the same environmental standards. In an
award ceremony marked by surprises, the Berlin Film Festival has given its top
prize to a documentary. On the adamant is about a daycare center for people
suffering from mental illness. The Best Acting Award went to an eight-year-old.
BBC News. Welcome back. This is part two of No Place Like Nam with me and Afam
on BBC World Service. Right now we are here in Da Nang, Vietnam. We're in an
area called N Doang. We've walked to the Mi Ke beach just two blocks away, which
is beautiful. This is the worst curb. See that curb? When you put your motorbike
down, then it's hard to get back out. 50 years after the last American combat
troops left Vietnam, some of the veterans now in their 70s have returned to live
here. This is their story. 2002 was my first return to Vietnam. And I was
expecting people to hate me. Richard Brown moved to Vietnam over 20 years ago to
work in the aviation industry. It's the career path that began in the military.
I was based in Chulai, which is about 50 miles down the coast at an air base
with the Marines. As an ordnanceman, loading bombs and missiles and ordnance,
1969, 1970, 1967. And on my first return to Vietnam, it was one of the most
vivid emotional experiences I had. People welcomed me back like I had just left
the day before. And they wanted to know what took you so long, getting back. I
got picked up by a motorbike driver who ended up being a guide. So he took me
out into the countryside to this VC cemetery. The Viet Cong, or VC, were South
Vietnamese guerilla fighters who were trained by and supported the communist
North. So I'm standing in front of this plaque, and it has 640 names on it. 640
people were in that cemetery. Starting from the 50s up to the end of the war.
And they're all listed by date. But they're also identified by what village they
came from. And I'm looking at this list of people thinking, this war was a
disaster for these people. All these guys that were fathers, sons, workers, the
labor for this hamlet, for this area. After that, he took me to his aunt's
house. He introduces me to his aunt as a VC officer. And she knew I had been
there with the Marine Corps, but she graciously served me water. And my guide
says, let's go upstairs. I want to show you something. So we go upstairs, and
there's a cabinet. And on top of the cabinet is a place for incense and
offerings for the part of relatives. So on the wall was a boy about high school
age, maybe 18 years old, with a shirt and tie that he just graduated from high
school. And the other picture was a girl wearing a cashmere sweater and a little
pearl necklace. And he said to me, these are her children. And I thought, these
people were just like us. They were just young people fighting for their
country. And I just, I couldn't stand it. It was just overbearing. The
Vietnamese people extended their welcome to us in unimaginable ways. They were
so forgiving. And there was no animosity or anger toward us as having
participated in the war. Chuck Searcy was one of the first US veterans to move
to Vietnam over 25 years ago. When I first came back in 1992, I was stunned by a
couple of things. One was the continuing level of struggle that the Vietnamese
people were facing. In just everyday life, they just didn't have enough of
anything. And they were struggling to rebuild their country and build a better
future for their children. And I was so impressed by what they were doing and
their commitment, their determination, and their gracious generosity toward us.
That's when I started thinking about coming back to Vietnam, finding some way to
do something that might help. Our country had a very hard time. We already have
a thousand years ruling by Chinese, a hundred years by French, and 21 years we
say American war. But somebody says Vietnam war. Bill's wife Anne was actually
born and raised in Da Nang. She wanted to share some of her own story. Yes,
during the war. I have two brothers working for the South government, same size
of American. One worked for the Air Force and another one worked for the Navy.
My family was really, really wealthy. But you know, end of the war in 1975, my
family had a hard time with the new government. My brothers, they had to be re-
educated. They went to the camp and stayed there. Also my brother in law, he had
to be re-educated for 11 years. We were very hungry because we didn't have
enough money. So we have a hard time, and I went to school every morning with my
empty stomach. After high school, I decided to be the school teacher, and I went
to the college to be the school teacher, and I was English teacher because by
that way I hope I could help more poor students who didn't have enough money. My
last job was tour guide, so it was the reason I was built tour guide, one of his
trips to Vietnam. And we worked together, and I learned a lot from him. When I
first moved over, I wasn't planning on living here, permanent. One had been my
guide for several years, and my wife died, my first wife. I told her, I said,
you know, I don't know what I'm going to do right now. I'd really like to maybe
come back to Vietnam and live instead of going back and forth every year with
veterans. Just come over here and live. So she helped me get set up with a
school teaching English for a year, and that was what I planned on doing,
staying here for a year. Next thing I know, we're building a house together.
Almost got divorced before we got married, trying to build a house together. And
then it just kind of grew, and then next thing I know, ten years later, I'm here
still. But it's been a good experience for me. I was in the FAA as an aviation
safety inspector in California, so I retired from the federal government, and on
my first return to Vietnam, I met my wife. So I moved to Vietnam, and for the
next seven or eight years, I was working in the industry in Vietnam to help
Vietnam upgrade its level of aviation safety. So I rode that until I reached my
maximum retirement age in Vietnam, 2014, and then I became a consultant to
aircraft leasing companies. And now they want me to work on a project. These are
some bullets and stuff that I found up in the DMC. I mean, there's still a lot
of this stuff around, but not as much as it used to be. But there's still a lot
of dangerous stuff up there. Anytime I take guys out in the field, out in the
bush, always have to feel cautious. Don't pick up anything, and be careful where
you step. I mean, this stuff is still there, and it's still dangerous. Every
year, there's people that get hurt with unexploded ordnance still laying around.
That stuff, a lot of it will last forever. The cluster bombs, they look like a
toy. It's a metal ball about the size of a softball, and they're still very,
very deadly. And the kids would pick them up and think they're toys. I had no
idea of the scale of that until I began to research and found that more than
100,000 Vietnamese had been killed or injured by bombs and mines since the war
ended in 1975, during peacetime. That was staggering. And then I realized, of
course, that much of that responsibility was ours as Americans, because we
dropped more than five million tons of bombs on Vietnam, more than all the bombs
in World War II and the Pacific and Europe. That's a massive amount of
explosives. And a lot of it did not detonate as designed. And we should find
ways to cooperate with the Vietnamese to work together to help clean up this
problem. In 2001, Chaco founded Project Renew based in Guangxi Province to
reduce the number of deaths and injuries caused by an exploded ordnance and
provide assistance to the victims. It's a partnership between international NGOs
and the local authorities. But the approach to dealing with the problem is
several components. One, teach the kids, the children, the adults, the farmers,
the villagers, the nature of the danger, what these explosives will do to you,
how to be safe, how to avoid accident injury, and also, very important, how to
report this to notify local authorities or trained experts who know how to deal
with this so they can come and clean it up safely. So that effort has resulted
in a reduction in accidents, injuries, and deaths over the last 20 years. Is the
Vietnamese government supportive of your project here? Yes. We work very closely
together. So there's a lot of cooperation. This is a humanitarian issue. This is
not a military issue. And that is reflected also in the fact that there's been a
change of attitude over the last 20 years in the U.S. government. There used to
be some hesitation, some reluctance about, no, should we help the Vietnamese or
not? You know, that's maybe shows support for the government. That's changed
over the years. And now, regardless of whether there's a Republican president or
a Democratic president, the funding has remained consistent and quite high and
has actually grown over the years. The attitude in Washington is that we will
continue this, not maybe indefinitely, but at least for the next decade. The
U.S. government will not make promises, but they indicate that they're favorable
toward doing this. Do you feel that these partly things to people like yourself
and, you know, your effort in promoting peace and reconciliation? I think
there's probably been some value in the fact that we're veterans. So hopefully
we've made some difference, along with a lot of other people together who have
really worked on this. You're listening to No Place Like Nam on BBC World
Service with me, Na Pham. Matthew Keenan is one of the veterans in Da Nam. He
spends his time volunteering at the local daycare centers, which support victims
of Agent Orange, the chemical defoliant that the U.S. Army sprayed on Vietnamese
jungles and villages during the war. Millions of gallons of it. On Wednesday?
Yeah. Yeah, Saturday morning. Saturday morning, yeah. Oh, yeah. Well, the
daycare center has been in operation for almost 10 years. There's two
classrooms, and then there's a conference room upstairs. But most of the
activity is down here on the first floor. Matthew is also part of an advocacy
group, Veterans for Peace. This is just their recreational area. In fact, this
area here, this whole roof area, they had a... Hello, they had a four-person
sink over here that we put in so the kids can wash their hands. And the problem
was is that it was exposed. So on a rainy day like today, the kids couldn't wash
their hands. And also on a very hot, sunny day, it wasn't comfortable to be
outside. So Veterans for Peace gave the money to build the roof over that area.
There's a list of about 20 different elements that the United States government,
Department of Veterans Affairs, has recognized as being presumptively caused by
Agent Orange, which includes things like diabetes, various forms of cancer. It's
very, very serious. It's affected many, many people. And now Vietnam Veterans
children and their grandchildren, there's a disproportionate number that have
birth defects. It seems like there's about 27 here today. And it fluctuates. It
can go back and forth depending on if the parents or somebody in the family can
get them here. Now the parents and the family members can go to work. They don't
have to worry about the boys and girls being in a safe place. Dava, which is the
nine association victims of Agent Orange, is the child of Vava, which is the
Vietnam association for victims of Agent Orange. So they get money from the
parent organization, Vava. They get money from UNICEF as a branch of the United
Nations. They have local businesses who also make donations. So they have a
whole variety of sources. There's always a need to do more work. Wednesday. Yes.
There's some event happening on Wednesday, so they're inviting me to come. Juan
is the staff member. He's only three feet tall and he's 40 years old. And he is
a very important person here because he helps do a lot of maintenance and we've
been very experienced. And for seven years, this has become my extended family.
For Matthew, this is very personal. It wasn't until 2013 and I myself was
diagnosed with cancer. And I've realized that I don't want to talk to doctors, I
don't want to talk to other vets, I want to come to where it happened. And that
was the driving force for me to come. And it was supposed to only be one trip. I
never imagined that after that one trip. And learning as much as I did, I
learned a lot because I saw how it affected the Vietnamese population. One of
the boys here, he's got a right arm. His arm is shorter than his left and his
hand is a little bit distorted. But he's a very good basketball player. And here
he's taking a three point shot and I think he nailed it. Right? I'm very proud
of his ability. Former Marine Bill Irvin also remembers coming into contact with
Agent Orange. Constantly. And I've got cancer because of it. It's not killing me
at this time. But yeah, anybody that served up in the I Corps, that's the most
heavily defoliated place in the world. You'd have an oily film on your skin as
you walk around there. At first we'd ask them, what is this? It's defoliated and
it also gets rid of the mosquitoes and don't worry about it, it's harmless. But
they found out that it wasn't. Her family's always had a bit of diabetes
problems and issues, nothing super major. But they had a huge stockpile of Agent
Orange here at the airport that, what was it, about five years ago they finally
started cleaning that up. I don't have any of my own children because of Agent
Orange. Manas Campbell. I was at Project Renew and they had a book of every
flight in Vietnam that sprayed and who was under the spray. And I saw that my
unit got sprayed. And I never had any health issues and it wasn't until I got my
friend pregnant and she aborted the baby at three months and there was no arms
and no legs on this fetus. You know, I would like to have my own son or my own
daughter or I'd love that, but I can't. I sponsor about seven children here in
Hoi An, in Kian Foundation. I've helped three of them go through school and now
I have a son who's, he'll be nine years old tomorrow. He comes from my wife's
previous relationship and he's amazing. I feel like he's me, you know. He's
adorable. These are visitors who have come here to help the children celebrate
Ted. Ted is Vietnamese Lunar New Year, a big celebration here. And to have some
fun dancing, sing songs and have music and... Many guys who I met at the VA
hospital where I was being treated for the cancer, they would talk to me, oh,
when were you in Vietnam? And I would say, last week. And they would say, what?
I would never go back to Vietnam. What are you crazy? And even friends of mine
who were here, they said, man, what are you nuts? I'm going to be drinking Pina
Coladas in South Carolina and you're going to Vietnam? And I would tell them,
it's a very safe place. You're listening to No Place Like Nam on BBC World
Service with me, Na Pham. Hoi An means peaceful meeting place. I first came here
in 2006. I was here for New Year's Day, 2007. You know, when I first moved here,
so I lived in Montclair, New Jersey. It was really a beautiful town. And I was
paying, between me and my girlfriend, we were paying $2600 per month for a
three-story apartment. I moved here, I was in credit card debt. I ended up
paying $300 a month for my hotel room. And food was nothing, you know, coffee's
a dollar. And I felt guilty. I was spending all this money just for me to live
in New Jersey. And here I had all this money that I could help people. Vietnam
as a whole, it's very community-oriented, very family-oriented. They help each
other. I mean, you see people riding on a bicycle with all kinds of their gear
and something will fall off and someone will yell and run down the street and
pick it up and bring it to the bicycle and help them. While the cost of living
is low, there is good health care and good weather. Vietnam is the communist
country which doesn't allow freedom of speech. If living in a communist country
makes your hair on your back stand up, then you shouldn't be living here. You
shouldn't even be visiting here. So I'm not really a political person, so I can
just fade into the background here. Along the street at my house, I don't know
everybody by name, but I know all the people who have been here for some years.
And every day we speak, say hello, and it's a very pleasant, comfortable
existence. How fluent is your Vietnamese? Oh, my Vietnamese is really terrible.
When I say that to Vietnamese, they say, oh, no, no, you speak excellent
Vietnamese. But it's not true. I can struggle and usually make myself
understood. But I can deal with the taxi. I can say, how much is the fare? Or
we're going to tell the taxi driver where we're going. But it's difficult to
have a significant conversation, a serious conversation. How do you say the
weather is beautiful today? Oh, joy. Oh, the whole night I trade gettles at
night. That's pretty fluent. This language is impossible. This is a tonal
language. So you'll have four or five different A's with different tones,
different pronunciations. You know, I'm packed up, so I don't hear. I mean, I
know a lot of Vietnamese from reading signs and walking around here with a
dictionary and trying to figure out how to talk to my wife and all this stuff.
But I can't speak it, really. And the only person I can talk to is my stepson
because he's gone to English school since he's five years old. But now you're an
English speaker and I can talk to you. So you're not leaving until I'm finished.
We're at the entranceway to Camp Reasoner, which was a marine base in the middle
60s. And then around 1971, it became an army base. Back in the day when I was
here, doing guard duty on the hill, overlooking all of Da Nang, which was just
one big rice paddy. Just be quiet for a moment. You don't hear anything. So for
me, from 50 years ago, hearing choppers, fighter jets, planes flying right over,
high on pass coming into the airport, now it's peaceful. Maybe hear some birds
chirping or something like that. But, you know, so it's a big contrast. You
could relax. The only one thing I can hear now is the wind blowing in my ears.
Every time I go to Chulai, I go back to where my squadron used to be. And I look
out over the new airport now. There's a terminal building where my hangar used
to be. I go out there and I look and I listen and it's just a ghost. It's all
gone. The living area is gone. Where the squadron headquarters were is gone.
There's just trees there now. But it's all gone. When I came back to Vietnam to
begin with, I came back to find the war or to at least revisit the war. The best
thing that I found over here is the peace. Yeah, I have no plans to go back to
the U.S. Of course, I miss my family and my friends. You know, I say this is the
only thing that makes sense, me living in Vietnam. It's the only thing. We've
been listening to No Place Like Nam on BBC World Service, presented by me, Na
Pham. The producer is Victoria Ferran and it is the just radio production for
BBC World Service. This is the BBC World Service, bringing you the story which
uncovered a multi-million dollar fishing scandal. I'm Jens Del and I've come to
Namibia to find out how the great hopes invested in its fishing industry have
been dashed. It's a story too about how journalists here and in faraway... We
are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party
services and platforms and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.