TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's 1 o'clock GMT. Hello, I'm Rahul Tandon and this is Business Matters here
on the BBC World Service. Today we're live in Hong Kong and the United States,
appropriate places to be as we're talking about the relationship between the two
largest economies in the world. China's foreign minister will be speaking
shortly as his country has been unveiling its plans to continue its economic
growth. By the end of this five-year period, the Chinese economy will be the
largest economy in the world. But will that lead to increased tensions with the
United States when it comes to trade? And what I fear now is that that
engagement is not happening. I don't think either side is ready or interested in
a negotiation. From what age do you think you want to work till? There'll be
protests across France on Tuesday as the government presses ahead to raise the
retirement age to 64. That's all coming up on Business Matters. First, the
latest news. BBC News with Sue Montgomery. The Mexican President, Andres Manuel
López Obrador, has held talks with the US ambassador to Mexico over the
kidnapping of four US citizens in the northern city of Matamoros. The FBI and
Mexican authorities are working together to locate the US citizens. From Mexico
City, Will Grant. President López Obrador gave more details about the
kidnappings than the US authorities were prepared to confirm. In particular, he
said that the four US citizens had been caught up in a firefight between rival
groups in the city of Matamoros and said that they had travelled to the city to
buy medication. Residents of US border towns often travel into Mexico to buy
prescription drugs, which are available at much lower prices than in the United
States. However, Matamoros is a dangerous city to visit at the best of times.
Rival factions of the Gulf cartel have been engaged in a violent conflict for
months. The UN Children's Agency UNICEF says the number of pregnant women and
girls who are suffering from malnutrition has soared by 25 per cent in fragile
countries like Somalia, Ethiopia and Afghanistan. It has urged the international
community to make food security a priority. Naomi Grimley has more details.
UNICEF estimates that more than one billion women across the world are
malnourished. The agency is worried that crises around the world have made it
increasingly hard for women and girls to get the food they need. Girls in
Afghanistan, for example, are no longer getting weekly iron and folic acid
supplements due to a ban on attending high school. While in sub-Saharan Africa,
many maternal nutrition programmes have been knocked off course due to the
pandemic, followed by rising food and fuel prices. President Zelensky has said
he has instructed Ukraine's military commanders to find the forces to boost the
defence of the besieged city of Bakhmut. Mr Zelensky said his top generals had
unanimously advised against a withdrawal from Bakhmut, which Russian forces have
bombarded for months and now surround in three sides. He said one could not
speak about abandoning any part of Ukraine. I told the commander-in-chief to
find the appropriate forces to help our troops in Bakhmut. There is no part of
Ukraine about which one can say that it can be abandoned. There is no Ukrainian
trench in which the resilience and heroism of our warriors would be disregarded.
The occupier kills for the very fact that we are Ukrainians. Case President
Recep Tayyip Erdogan will face a single opponent in May's presidential election
after opposition parties agreed on a joint candidate. Kemal Kaleç Darulu is the
leader of the secular Republican People's Party. BBC News The defence ministry
in Peru says five soldiers drowned and another has gone missing during a
confrontation with anti-government protesters in the city of Elave. It said the
corporals had been swept away while trying to cross a river to avoid hundreds of
demonstrators. The World Bank has suspended talks over its future engagement
with Tunisia following President Kai Saeed's recent criticism of sub-Saharan
migrants. The outgoing head of the bank, David Malpass, said Mr Saeed's remarks
had triggered racially motivated harassment and even violence in Tunisia.
Journalists in Saudi Arabia say they're worried about an Islamist preacher who
has publicly criticised on Twitter entertainment reforms in the country, which
he argues are against Islamic values. Some of his supporters believe the
preacher, Emad Al Mubayyad, has been detained. Sebastian Usher reports. In a
video posted on Twitter a few days ago, Emad Al Mubayyad expressed his
opposition to the opening up of Saudi Arabia to the kind of entertainment that
not so long ago would never have been permitted there. Such dissent from a
current line in the kingdom is dangerous. Mr Al Mubayyad swiftly posted another
video, rowing back on his criticism. That was four days ago. Activists say he's
not been heard from since. Saudi security has announced that an unidentified man
has been arrested for posting video content which it said contained false
information that undermined public order. Activists believe the unnamed man is
Emad Al Mubayyad. Brazil's justice minister and the country's tax department
have opened two investigations into the former president Jair Bolsonaro after
media reports alleged he'd tried to illegally import jewellery worth more than
three million dollars. The collections were given to Mr Bolsonaro and his wife
during an official trip to Saudi Arabia in 2021. BBC News. Hello and welcome to
Business Matters here on the BBC World Service. I'm Rahul Tandon. Plenty
happening on a busy Tuesday. We'll be talking interest rates. Whenever the chair
of the Federal Reserve, the US Central Bank, speaks, the world listens. Jerome
Powell is talking on Tuesday. We look ahead to what that might mean and...
French people think they have low pensions while they have the highest pensions
in Europe. They think they work more as they work less in any other country.
They kind of protest all the time. They certainly do according to some. Why are
they protesting again on Tuesday? Well, this is to do with retirement ages.
They're being told they have to work a little bit longer. Do they have a point
when they take to the streets? I'll be joined throughout the programme by two
guests on opposite sides of the world. Rachel Cartland, author, writer, expert
on Hong Kong. Now, Rachel, I'm sure you are decades away from a retirement age.
But if you do think about it, do you have an age in mind where you think, yeah,
I'd like to not have to work anymore? Well, no, I got, I wouldn't say forced
out, but the strange political situation in Hong Kong meant that I left my job
as a civil servant in my mid-fifties. And I actually love my work and I've gone
on doing it unpaid in various forms ever since. I've been so involved in think
tanks and critiquing government policies and so on and so on. But it's a really
fascinating subject this idea about what's going to happen with the ageing
population. I used to be really interested in it work-wise because I looked
after what we call social security and what the Americans call welfare. And this
concept or fear of the enormous ageing bulge was something that preoccupied us.
Well, we're going to look forward to your comments on that. And don't retire
from business matters for some time yet. Rachel, we also got Peter Morisi,
economist at the University of Maryland in the USP. I have to be honest, when I
think of you working, I just think you're probably going to work up to your
deathbed if you don't mind me bringing that horrible issue up. Well, I'm 74. I
retired from the university at 68 so I could focus more on my writing. That's
when I put my column writing. I write two columns a week, one from the
Washington Times and one from Dow Jones Market Watch in full bore. I was
recently out to dinner with my econometrics professor who's writing a book and
he's about 86. And he said, Peter, Angela and I, that's his wife, just cannot
imagine you ever retiring. They've known me 50 years, more than that. And I
guess they're right. I'll work as long as people want to hire me and as long as
I have the health to do it. I love my work and I'm fortunate in that I went into
something that I terribly enjoy. Well, you know, we're going to talk about this
a lot more in the programme, but I think that is a very important thing. I say
to my kids, you know, do something you enjoy because, you know, we're all living
a bit longer. You're going to be doing it for a long time. More on that to come.
But we're going to start the programme by talking about something I'm really
interested to hear Peter and Rachel's views on, which is US-China relations. The
meeting of the National People's Congress is continuing with China, of course,
setting out its economic policies. That's going to go on for quite a few days.
It could end on Sunday. In a few hours, we're going to hear from China's new
foreign minister, Qin Gang, on one area we're sure he's probably going to talk
about and people are going to look at very closely is relations with the world's
largest economy, the US. I've been speaking to Victor Gao from the Centre for
China and Globalisation, a think tank with links to the Chinese Communist Party.
I would say the coming five years will be the most important period of time
because if China can really pull this off in terms of economic development, by
the end of this five year period, the Chinese economy will be the largest
economy in the world. You are somebody who knows how the Chinese government
works. You're a former diplomat. How are they going to pull that off? Because
this moment of moving the economy from a middle income country to a high income
country is a difficult task, isn't it? Yes and no. I think the overall Chinese
economic development has already generated enough momentum that it's not
possible to stop it. I think the government's target for 2023 GDP growth is 5%.
I think this goal is very prudent but highly conservative. The general
expectation will be the growth rate eventually for this year will be higher than
5%. How much higher? We still do not know. I personally believe that 2023 GDP
growth for China will be higher than that in India and this will be very
significant. This means the economic gap between the United States, the largest
economy by official exchange rate, and China will be further narrowed and paving
the way for China to be the largest economy around 2030. Victor, we're going to
hear, aren't we, on Tuesday from China's foreign minister. He'll outline China's
foreign policy. Do you see the trade war between China and the US now
escalating? Is that inevitable? Absolutely. I think the tariff war, the trade
war, is not working against China. It's not helping achieve the US strategic
goal of disrupting China's economic development. That is, of course, the Chinese
view. I've also been speaking to Wendy Cutler, Vice President of the Asia
Society Policy Institute and a former negotiator in the office of the US Trade
Representative. 2022 was a banner year in terms of trade by value between the
United States and China with trade and goods totaling about $700 billion. So I
just put that on the table first. There's still a lot of trade that's going on
between our two countries. It's no secret that there is strategic decoupling
going on in certain sectors. And these decoupling efforts are not just led by
the United States. They're also being implemented by China as well. In the
coming weeks and months, you can count on additional export restrictions and
maybe even outbound investment restrictions being placed on Chinese trade. You
as someone who's been involved in those trade discussions between the US and
China at the highest level, is this one of the most tense periods that we've
ever seen? Well, absolutely. And during my long term career at the office of the
US Trade Representative, while we weren't seeing eye to eye with China, we were
sitting across the table from them and having discussions. And what I fear now
is that that engagement is not happening. I don't think either side is ready or
interested in a negotiation. If it's only for each side to explain their
position to the other country, and at least try and listen to the concerns of
the other party. So it's very tense now. Rachel, it's going to get tenser, isn't
it? Yes, it unfortunately seems that way. I mean, I identify very much with what
your last interviewee Wendy Cutler has said. And as a very long term resident of
Hong Kong, I look back to years like 2008, 2010, 2015, even 2018, which was such
actually a cheerful period. You know, if you think of the Beijing Olympics in
2008, that was perhaps a high watermark. But this incredible deterioration in
relationships at every level is something that is actually relatively recent.
And the extraordinary thing is that it's kind of hard to say why it has happened
exactly. There wasn't one single incident that precipitated it. But it is a
reality. And as she says, a reality that looks as if it's going to get worse
rather than better to the detriment, I think, of all of us. And I would say
rather grandly the entire planet given the tremendous challenges that confront
us as a human species. These are, of course, Peter, the world's two largest
economies. But there is no doubt in the coming weeks, we're likely to see
announcements from President Biden that are going to put further trade
restrictions when it comes to US companies dealing with China, aren't we? Oh,
absolutely. I mean, the Americans are very concerned that our leadership in high
technology is being eroded by Chinese mercantilism, but moreover, that it'll
come back at us and weapons in the ultimate struggle for primacy in the Pacific.
The Americans are not going to give up their role in the Pacific and ensuring
the free flow of goods and navigation and so forth. I'd point out to you, we're
not talking about China becoming a high income country. China's got a population
of 1.4 billion and the Americans have a population of about one third, one
quarter that size. I mean, China's staying a middle income country and
continuing to grow. They're going to inevitably have a larger economy. But the
question is, do they move up the development ladder and are they capable of
producing the kind of technologies we produce? In some cases, yes. In many
cases, no. But also for the Chinese, symbolically becoming the largest economy
in the world. And I know you as an economist will say there are many different
ways of measuring it and etc. No, no, they're going to be the largest economy in
the world. We've known that's going to happen for a very long time. I mean, if
you put all of Europe together and you get the Brits back in the EU and all
that, they're bigger than us. Oh, don't start that conversation. I understand,
but they're bigger than us. I mean, when you have four times the population,
there's no trick to have a bigger economy. What they're doing is creating a
goalpost so they can celebrate it and say they're superior to the Americans.
They may become superior to the Americans in some way, but not because they have
a bigger economy. So they're basically creating kind of a false goalpost. But I
think Victor Gao used an interesting word when he talked about momentum. I mean,
this is what I've seen over the past 20, 30 years, especially in the progress
has been so incredibly rapid. And if you look at the Chinese universities now,
they're competitive on a world stage in a way that I think would never, ever
have been expected. And Chinese academics themselves, Chinese scientists, I
think there's something in this thought that it's potentially unstoppable, these
technological breakthroughs that China may now be able to make. If you go to
India, you will find scientists and engineers and medical services and so forth
on the same level as the United States. The real problem in India is that it's
not as widespread as it is in America. It's more or less universal in the United
States, and the same applies to China. China is placing so much emphasis on its
military. It's spending so much of its wealth on its military. It spends less
than the US. I understand that. They also don't have to defend Europe and our
allies in Asia. But they're spending so much of that when in reality, they have
a lot of unmet developmental needs internally in rural areas and so forth.
They're not rich enough yet to be playing this game, but they choose to. And
that's why we're in the conundrum we are in. I mean, basically, if an American
top official goes to Taiwan, they immediately threaten it by putting, you know,
25 boats around it. I mean, they do very provocative things. But also, I have to
say this, the Americans do very provocative things to the Chinese as well. Yeah,
go on Rachel, I bet you agree with it. Yeah, I was saying, I mean, I think this
is the fearsome thing that we're seeing now, this sort of confrontation that to
me is still has come from nowhere in a sense, you know, we've had the Wolf
Warrior Chinese diplomacy on one side. And I'm afraid I noticed it with my
American friends and what they say to me and write to me and so on. Now, this is
strong, extraordinary sort of assumption, really, that China is just wicked
through and through that somehow seems to underlie a lot of American thinking.
We don't assume that Rachel. It's Mr. Xi that's wicked. And the Chinese
Communist Party, be clear. That's what the feeling is here. Now, you know, I
don't know that that's completely accurate. But the point is, look at what they
do in the Western provinces to the Muslims. And look at how they're supplying
the Russians with chips and what the Russians are doing in the Ukraine. Can a
regime as powerful and important as China support what the Russians are doing in
the Ukraine? Well, there are other countries. Let's be fair here. India has not
come out and condemned the Russians. There's a difference here. The Chinese are
their source of supply of computer chips, for Pete's sakes. There's a difference
between India straddled where it is. But can I put a point to you that a lot of
people say that because we're going to come to the end of this conversation. One
of the reasons that we're seeing this antagonism is because this is the first
time in a long time that the U.S. are being challenged, not just militarily as
the Russians, as the Soviet Union, if we go back to that era did. But the Soviet
Union was never a challenge to the U.S. economically. China is here for the
first time. We have a country challenging the U.S. economically and militarily.
And the U.S. doesn't like that. Absolutely. That's a big part of this game. The
Americans, the Americans are running scared about their technology. Now, we've
been down this path before in World War II. I mean, the Germans had incredible
technology that was threatening to us. And so I think that's I think, hey, you
want it, you want an analog from history? Serbia, 1914, Taiwan, 2023. Yeah, I
mean, this is a very unfortunate thing, I think. I think we can look, if we want
to, at the guns of August and the beginning of the First World War and see how
we could creep into this really unnecessary and devastating confrontation over
Taiwan. Look at how the Chinese are intimidating Taiwan. What do you expect the
Americans to do? What would the Europeans have us do? What would the Brits have
us do? Step down and let them take Taiwan? Yeah, this seems to have sort of come
from nothing. And again, you know, I look back only a few years ago, the status
quo in Taiwan was accepted by everybody. There was an awful lot of coming and
going between Taiwan and Fujian province, which is pretty close. And as I say,
it seems from nothing, we've now got both sides somehow deciding that we're
going to have World War III over Taiwan, which seems beyond devastating. Well,
you know, President Xi obviously has a stated aim of when he would like to see
Taiwan back as part of China. It's been a fascinating conversation. It's been
really nice to hear both of you interacting, giving different views from the
different parts of the world that you are in. I'm sure this is a topic that we
are going to continue to talk about here on Business Matters. But let's move
away to another topic now, because whenever Jerome Powell speaks, he is the
chairman of the Federal Reserve, the US Central Bank. Everybody thinks the
president's powerful. Yeah, but I think more people listen to Jerome Powell
anyway, because when he talks about interest rates, that doesn't just affect the
US economy. It also, of course, affects the world economy as well. And he's
going to be in front of Congress over the next few days talking and taking a lot
of questions. Let's go back in time and hear what he said at the start of
February at the time of the last rate rise. Over the past year, we've taken
forceful actions to tighten the stance of monetary policy. We've covered a lot
of ground, and the full effects of our rapid tightening so far are yet to be
felt. Even so, we have more work to do. Today, the FOMC raised our policy
interest rate by 25 basis points. We continue to anticipate that ongoing
increases will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy
that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2% over time. Peter,
when I speak to a lot of economists about the US economy nowadays, they tell me
they're very confused with what's going on. They look at those job figures. They
see a market that's still growing, but at the same time, interest rate rises
were supposed to slow it down. Are you confused? Well, it's a very difficult
time to read the economy, because we entered this period with households having
so much money in their hands that they didn't spend. We gave them $5 trillion in
businesses and households. Was that a mistake? During the pandemic, and they
didn't spend a lot of it. Should they have been given that much cash? No, that
was a mistake. And it's easy for, you know, I have a lot of fun blaming Joe
Biden for that because he gave them the last $2 trillion of the five. And he was
warned by Larry Summers, a good Democrat, not to do that, but he did it anyway.
But the reality is Donald Trump had a hand in it too. And it isn't, forget about
Trump being Trump, the Republicans were happy to do it. We basically printed too
much money during the pandemic, and it's coming back at us. And that makes it
very, very difficult to put the skids on things. But you know, when he talks
about, we're taking this concerted action, we've been dramatic and all this,
that's nonsense. Inflation is 6%, and his policy rate is less than 5. So what
should he do? That's a negative. And if we look at the last time we've been
through something like this, it was when Paul Volcker had to deal with inflation
that was well above 10% and he raised interest rates to 17%, not 5%. You know, I
really love the liberal press. You know, they like big government and high
interest rates make big government difficult because of the borrowing costs on
the federal government. So I just read the Wall Street Journal, they did all
kinds of comparisons on recent rate increases to show this was the steepest,
except what the fact was, they didn't show Paul Volcker's rate increases. Oh,
that was too far in the distant past. This is not a big increase he's done. I
read the same article. Let me ask you this question then. Are you saying 17%? Is
that where Jerome Powell should be going? Where should he go? 17, 10? Because
that is going to... 10. 10. Doesn't that put the US into recession? Certainly.
It's time for some tough medicine. It'd be better to take a recession that lasts
six months and get rid of this inflation than go through what we went through in
the 70s, which is exactly what he's imposing on us by not moving fast enough.
You know, he's making the same mistakes that two Federal Reserve chairmen in the
1970s made, and that is not moving fast enough. He's been told about this in the
press over and over again, not just by me, but by others. But yet he continues
to move tepidly. That's unfortunate. And we're going to pay for that. Well, one
thing, Rachel, is I know that Jerome Powell has to look after the US economy,
but if we look a little bit more globally, and you can help us with this
perspective, if the US moves to 10% interest rate rises, I mean, that's going to
make an incredibly strong dollar and that's going to have serious consequences
for the global economy. Yes, absolutely. So, yeah, I mean, obviously now the US
has got this kind of conflict between, you can, we're talking about the military
earlier, between its own role as a national whatever, and its global role too.
And I don't know how Peter would feel about that, how the US has to act to not
jeopardise the global economy. Well, I guess you're posing a question to me. And
I liken it to our investors that invest in junk bonds. They like to get high
interest rates when interest rates are very low. So they go into companies that
are very shaky. And then when the Fed raises rates, those companies go bust and
they lose their money. Likewise, how many times do we have to go through the
cycle of developing country governments borrowing too much when interest rates
are low because of the Fed? And then when we have to raise interest rates, they
get into trouble. And by the way, it's not just us. There are other places to
borrow money. For example, in the European Union, but they're raising interest
rates as well. To some extent, there's been a lot of profligate behaviour by
governments in the EU, in Britain, in the United States, but also in developing
countries. They have basically borrowed a lot of money on the premise that
interest rates will forever be zero. And that was silly. Well, OK, that is a
fascinating point because we haven't got a long time before we get to the news.
But quick answer if you can on this one, Peter. Is the era of cheap money and
low interest rates over? Yes. The reason being, and I can't go into the details
here, is we just came out of a period where a lot of the growth was generated by
software, which did not require a lot of money to establish Google. We're now
going into a hardware era. We're going to compete on chips and so forth. That's
very capital intensive. That's going to raise the price. Peter, always
interesting to get your views on the economy there. Of course, President Biden,
big week for him. He'll be unveiling his thoughts on the budget a little bit
later this week. We'll have plenty of coverage of that. Of course, coming up
after the news, we're going to be talking about retirement age. We know that
Pizza Maurici is going to keep going on and on and on. We don't just mean on
this programme. We just mean generally with his work. We also know that
Rebecca's got a strong work ethic as well. But what age would you like to
retire? I wouldn't mind retiring in the next 20 minutes or so, to be honest with
you. This is the BBC World Service, where Misha Glenny is telling the story of
Russia. The country's history goes some way to explaining the way it behaves
today. You could accept the culture, how wonderful the ballet is, the literature
and how charming individual Russians are. But yet you can still see it as a
potential threat. In episode three of the series, Catherine the Great, the
German who became Empress of Russia when her husband was murdered. She was very
involved in the coup, but not necessarily overtly. For one thing, she was
pregnant at the time by another man. It was her military successes that earned
her the great title. She took Crimea, Western Ukraine and a big chunk of Poland.
There was something about the 18th century that does from this distance look
like a kind of golden age that didn't stick. The invention of Russia at
bbcworldservice.com. Coming up here on Business Matters, we're going to continue
the conversation with Rachel, of course, who is in Hong Kong. We've got Peter in
the US. We're going to be talking about retirement ages. What age do you think
you should retire? In France, people are being told they're going to have to
work longer until the age of 64. Big strikes taking place across the country.
Rachel's going to tell us about the end of the mass mandate and we're going to
be talking about Swiss chocolate that's just not Swiss enough. BBC News. The
Mexican President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador has held talks with the US
ambassador to Mexico over the kidnapping of four US citizens in the northern
city of Matamoros. Mr Lopez Obrador said the Americans had been caught up in a
gun battle between rival criminal groups. The UN Children's Agency UNICEF
estimates that more than a billion women and adolescent girls across the world
are malnourished. It says crises from war to Covid-19 have made it increasingly
hard for them to get the food they need. President Zelensky has said in his
nightly address that he's instructed Ukraine's military commanders to find the
forces to boost the defence of the besieged city of Bahmut. Russian forces now
surrounded on three sides. Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan will face a
single opponent in May's presidential election after opposition parties agreed
on a joint candidate. Kemal Kaleçdaroglu leads the secular Republican People's
Party. The defence ministry in Peru says five soldiers drowned during a
confrontation with anti-government protesters in the city of Elave. It said
they'd been swept away on Sunday while trying to cross a river to avoid
demonstrators. Brazil's Justice Minister and the country's tax department have
opened two investigations into the former President Jair Bolsonaro. After media
reports alleged he'd tried to illegally import jewellery worth more than three
million dollars, Mr Bolsonaro, who's in the United States, says he's being
hounded. Officials in the US state of Georgia have charged 23 people, including
a Frenchman and a Canadian, with domestic terrorism offences. Police say the
suspects were part of a coordinated group who threw petrol bombs in bricks
during a protest against a new police training centre. Welcome back to Business
Matters. With me, Rahul Tandon. We've got Peter in the US. We've got Rachel, of
course, in Hong Kong. Rachel, I wanted to talk to you about something. Sorry for
trying to rename you in the course of the programme already so far. I was told
the producer, at least you didn't get stripped into Barbara. Do you know what? I
have written that down on paper in front of me. Do not call her Barbara the
famous, of course, romantic novelist. One of the things when we were talking
about the National Congress, of course, which has taken the National People's
Congress, one of the ideas that's been floated, and they do have some
interesting ideas there, and I just wanted to get your thoughts on this, Rachel,
and also Peter briefly, was this idea that instead of having a traditional two-
day weekend, they alternated it. So one week you work six days, and then the
next week you work four days, so you get three days off at the weekend. The idea
is to boost tourism within China. Rachel, do you think that's a good idea? Would
you like that? Yeah, I mean, I think it's all of a piece with China's emphasis
on they're going to revitalize the economy through internal consumer spending,
and I think in that particular situation, yeah, it should work. China has got
lots of beauty spots and historic sites and so on, and a tremendous emphasis on
its own culture and history and so on, and of course, within the recent past,
people have got disposable income in a way that they never used to have, and so
they can go and see these famous sites and so on, spend money there. I think it
makes a lot of sense from the point of view of the economy. I mean,
sociologically and organizationally, I'm not so sure that it makes a massive
difference. There is this big debate going on in Europe now, isn't there, about
four-day weeks and so on, and I guess we need a bit longer to see if it really
works. I mean, and the whole disruption caused by working from home, which seems
to actually to have a lot to be said in its favor, and then fascinating thoughts
about do you marry up working from home with town planning so that you get a new
kind of city which is made for people who live and work right on the doorstep
rather than going in for these massive traditional commutes. Yep, yep.
Interesting points there. Peter, what about you? Would you like this idea of six
days one week, four days the next? Oh, I think it's a great idea. I think the
Chinese are onto something. When I was in the federal government briefly trying
to manage, we had something called 594. You work nine hours a day, and so every
other week you'd get a Friday off. That didn't work very well because everybody
was taking different Fridays off or different days off. It wasn't a Friday. You
could take any day you want. This works if everybody's doing the same thing
because try to have a meeting where you have six or eight principals, and two
are out by virtue of which day they choose to take off. So my feeling is it's a
good idea. It's the same thing with this flex time business. If you're going to
go to the three-day week in the office, two days at home, then do a Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday. So when you call a meeting, you're not sitting there with
six people in the room and two people on Skype. But I like it. I think it makes
good sense. I think it's good for morale, and try it for a while, and if the
Chinese like it, go with it. Yeah. Let's see what happens there. Let's see if
that discussion is put into place. Now, trade unions and left-wing parties in
France have called on workers to bring the country to a standstill on Tuesday.
This is in protest that the government plans to raise the retirement age to 64
from 62. Earlier today, I talked to Emmanuel Grimond, founder and CEO of Maximus
Retre. The truth is that the average age of pension today in France is 63 years
and six months. So the real increase for most people would be only six months.
The leaders of the products are the CGT, the extreme left union. But they have a
personal agenda because they have internal elections very soon. And the tougher
you are in the street, the more chance you have to get elected at the next polls
in the CGT. La France Insoumise, Jean-Luc Mélenchon, also is very keen on
protesting to overthrow Macron's government because they couldn't realise that
in the poll boxes and they are trying to do that in the street. This raises an
interesting question, doesn't it? Because is it not inevitable that people are
going to have to work longer in countries like France because there's an ageing
population? There just aren't enough people in the workforce. Of course, it is
inevitable that we will have to work longer in France. All European countries
have a pension age between 65 and 68 years old. We are at 62 official age. And
obviously, we have been protected for a while by our demography, which was a
little bit better than in some other European countries. People know that we
would have to work longer, but it's kind of not in my backyard symptom. They say
they realise that they are concerned and that we'd have to work longer, even
though it's not working two years longer. Unfortunately, I think that this will
have, what will happen soon, that the age of 63 or 64 will become the normal
age. Staying on that global context, could we see these protests in other
countries, asides from France? I do not think you might have protests in other
parts of the world or other countries, mainly because, especially in Europe, all
countries already have done the job of moving the pension age at the age of 65
or 67 or 68, which is much longer than the French one, which would go to 64. And
also because other countries didn't have huge protests. French people think they
have low pensions, while they have the highest pensions in Europe. They think
they work more as they work less in any other country. They kind of protest all
the time. In international surveys, we have French people who are more
pessimistic than Afghanistan and Iraq. Can you imagine that? So I don't think
you would have this kind of protest so strong in any other countries. Good
insight there from Emmanuel Grimaud, founder and CEO of Maximus, which I'm going
to bring in Michael Burnick, former director of California's Labour Department,
in just a second. A couple of things I wanted to tell you about. South Korea has
announced plans to change the maximum number of hours its citizens can work,
boosting it from 52 to 69. Of course, a country with a low birth rate, their
people having to work harder and longer, while Japan's senior adviser to the
Prime Minister there has said the country will disappear, those were his words,
if it cannot slow a fall in its birth rate, which means, Rachel, that people are
going to have to work a lot longer, aren't they, to sustain a lot of economies,
some in Asia, some in Europe, where populations are ageing very quickly. Yeah,
that's what we always used to think. But recently, I've begun to think about and
consider another aspect to all this, which is actually health. Because when I
was working in the Hong Kong government, I was concerned with the social
security system. We used to look a lot at trends in ageing, have seminars and
conferences about what we're going to do with the ageing burden and so on. And
the answer always seemed to be part of it, to increase the retirement age, so
that people working longer seemed quite straightforward. But now involved in
Business and Professionals Federation, which is a kind of think tank in Hong
Kong, we're looking currently at the Hong Kong government's primary healthcare
blueprint. And you can see that what is actually a very pertinent issue is how
healthy are people. You know, they may be living long, but they're actually
having to have more and more medical treatments to keep them going. So I think
that what people really need to start pondering upon is really is middle age.
How do you make middle-aged people healthy enough to keep wanting to work and to
keep being able to work without endless medical interventions? And I do believe
that's going to become quite crucial in future. Well, they need to follow
obviously the Peter Morisi diet because he's still going very strong got through
middle age and he's not in old age yet. But it is an issue, isn't it, Peter?
Because we look in the US, you know, you had so many people who retired in their
50s in the pandemic, and now people want to get them back into the workforce.
It's not easy, though, is it? No, it's not. When you get off the conveyor belt,
it's hard to get back on because you fall behind with regard to all this
technology. You know, if I went back in the classroom now, all the software's
changed. I mean, it's a huge restart cost in terms of going back in the
classroom. Now, fortunately, I have other work that I do that, but what I do
evolves and I've had to adjust and so forth and learn to do new things. Once you
get off the conveyor belt in your 50s, it's very, very hard to relaunch at the
level that you'd like. But the important thing here is health is one aspect of
it. We have to start keeping people healthy longer so they're not kind of health
care basket cases for 20 years. The other is we have to find ways to make work
more rewarding, more amicable and so forth. Work from home is a big part of
that. Commuting was a terrible burden on me in my early 60s, I felt. I had a
long commute to the University of Maryland. But we also have to find ways to
help people transition as they get older into different lines of work that are
needed because they can't do some of the things they did when they were
youthful. But also, it's kind of monotonous to do the same thing for 50 years.
Yeah, that is so true, actually. That is so true. I've been a journalist for a
long time. Maybe time to do something. I've listened to you and I know that
you're bored. Yeah, well, I'm monotonous, you know. I think that's one of the
nicest things you've ever said to me. Yeah, I am. Yep, that's very true. You're
very good at what you do, Raoul. Let's bring in Michael Pernick there, former
director of California's Labor Department, the Employment Development
Department. Michael, do you mind me asking, we've spoken before, tell people how
old you are and when you're going to retire. I am never. I am 70 and I am never
going to retire. And I've got to tell you, I think that I find, you know, I see
things, I think, more clearly now after being in the field now for 40 plus
years. Now, for all of us, it gets more difficult to hang in there and be active
and be part of it. And, you know, in all of these fields, there's still a youth
orientation. But if you're willing to stick in, I just feel that, you know, I
look back on writing I did in my 20s and 30s and 40s and I'm embarrassed by a
lot of it. So I think, you know, it's true in all fields. Do you? Yeah, we've
gained perspective. Has there been a moment when you thought, I've had enough of
this, it is time to retire? Are you as enthused about work here you are at 70 as
when you were 20? Yes, I try to. It's a challenge, but I try to, you know, come
up with new things to write about and, you know, not be sort of a jukebox of the
same records and try to see new challenges and the field that I'm in in
employment law and policy. You know, fortunately, there continue to be new
challenges. A lot of them are the same challenges in terms of low wage work
forces here in California and declining middle jobs that we had in the late 70s.
It's interesting how similar some of these issues are. But so far, so good. I've
managed to try to keep an interest. Do you understand, Michael, somebody who
wants to keep working as long as you can, the French perspective of some people
in France, which is, hey, look, 62 was a good age. You've worked for a long
time. If you can financially can afford it, stop working and, you know, go and
enjoy the rest of your life trying out maybe different things. Do you understand
the sort of anger in France against the government's proposals? Well, I
understand that each of us is different and people have very different views in
terms of what they want out of life. I will say, though, it's very interesting
that the labor force participation rate, not just me, the labor force
participation rate here in the United States over the past two decades has gone
steadily up for workers over 55, now over 64.6 percent for workers over 60 and
for workers over 75 even. So the dynamic we have here, yes, we did see increased
retirements during the pandemic, though that's beginning to change. But we've
really seen an increase among my cohort, the boomer population, an increase in
the labor force participation rate. People are moving the other way. They want
to stay in the labor market and the numbers, the Bureau of Labor Statistics
numbers bear that out. Michael, always a pleasure to speak to you again. You
keep going strong. Rachel, can I bring you in here? Isn't there a need, though,
for people to retire? It creates positions for younger people to move into. We
can't have people going on forever like Peter, can we? Yeah, I mean, that's a
good point. And also, too, we're currently talking about what you might call sit
down and enjoy jobs, whereas I think you've also got to think about manual
labor. And isn't it only fair to let people who've been involved in heavy manual
labor take a rest before they become more prone to accidents and so on? I mean,
one of the sort of not a lot of people know that factors is that Hong Kong
actually used to, I mean, until last year, had the world's highest life
expectancy. We've now been pushed off the top of the chart by Monaco. But for
example, I was reading this morning about a 90-year-old hawker of roasted
chestnuts and sweet potatoes who's involved in a fracar with the police because
she was well, it's a rather complicated thing about the rules. But she certainly
is keen to keep going with her trade and profession. And although I think you've
also got to look a bit with these labor statistics and so on, are older people
working because they want to or because they have to? That's something that
deserves analysis. Yeah, Peter, I can imagine you being in a fracar when you're
90, to be perfectly honest with you. But can you I mean, that is such an
important point that Rachel makes, doesn't it? We're talking about people having
a choice when it comes to when they retire. A lot of people don't. They have to
keep working because they need the money. Well, the reality is that you have
three choices. We can have a lot of poor people. We can have people work longer.
We could pay a lot more taxes and not live very well when we're young. And most
of those are unpalatable. The trick here is we need to transition people who do
manual work into other lines of work as they approach 50. We sort of think of
people going to school between 18 and 23 after high school and learning how to
do something and then going off with it and that's the rest of their life. But
in reality, that's not the case for everyone. Also important is you can train
people to sit and do work in front of a computer screen in 12, 18 weeks. I mean,
they're not going to be running Apple computer, but they can learn to do coding
and things of that nature. In fact, Google is training people to do things like
that and Amazon and so forth. And they're doing it pro bono in some cases. And
so we need to start to take people and say at 50, you're going to have a pause.
You're going to take a year off and learn to do something new. Well, you know
what? I'm with you. I'm bored. As you said earlier, I'm in my 50s. I need to sit
down, pause, take some time off. I've got about eight minutes to get through
this program there before I make that specific decision. Thank you for pointing
me in the right direction. I would fill the eight minutes. Well, you could fill,
I think, more than eight, to be honest with you. Very interesting story coming
up. Can I get Rachel to listen to this particular news report? This is one of
the last places on the planet where you still have to wear a mask. But after
almost three years of both indoor and outdoor use in public, Hong Kong is
finally dropping its mask mandate. Hong Kong's move to scrap masks comes after
the government launched its Hello Hong Kong campaign to bring back tourists and
international visitors and business people. And starting Wednesday, they can
breathe easy with the mask mandate effectively over. Yeah, that's how CNN
reported that mandate being over. What's it been like? It was last week. How are
you feeling now? Does it feel strange? Well, I must admit, I've just come back
from seven weeks in Europe. So I was all prepared psychologically to put my mask
back on again. But I've become attuned to mask-free Europe. And so it doesn't
feel strange. But I must say, many people in Hong Kong are finding it odd. And
what's been really intriguing is that certainly in the early days, I would say
that more people keeping their masks on voluntarily than removing them. And we
got some sort of interesting, perhaps sad little quirks there. Quite a lot of
teenage girls apparently said they want to keep their masks on. And this is
really sad, because they feel that they're ugly and that the mask management...
Yeah, I know. And the mask sort of... That's not good. That's not good. I know.
But you know, it links up with so much that we know about the sort of social
pressures that adolescent girls face and so on. But there's also been this sort
of weddedness in Hong Kong to masks. In the end, people were fed up with them,
quite a lot of them. But although there's quite weak evidence for the efficacy
of masks and quite strong evidence of the efficacy of vaccination, it's really
weird because people behaved in opposite way. They were absolutely shocked in
the early days if any kind of mask removal or suggestion that masks should be
removed. But there was a massive vaccination hesitancy, vaccine hesitancy,
especially amongst the elderly population, which caused tremendous problems. At
one time, we did have a real breakdown of our health system because of this
influx of unvaccinated elderly cases into the hospitals. Yeah, we saw that.
Yeah, we saw that across China as well. Didn't we? Thank you for sort of giving
us the experiences there. Very sad, the story you said there about young girls
and the reasons why they're not taking off their mask. Can I ask you, we're
going to move to our final story. Peter, when you're in an airport, do you buy
loads of Toblerone or is that just me? The chocolate, the Swiss chocolate?
Actually, that's not something I like. Is it not? But I do buy other chocolates.
I buy Cadbury. I like that. Oh my gosh. The issue of the mountaintop and so
forth. I want you to know that this has been a big issue in international trade
for a long time. During the Uruguay round, we made a deal. For example, we can't
call anything made in America that tastes like scotch, scotch. Quite right. And
the Brits can't call anything made in Britain bourbon because we kind of each
got a name of something that we said was ours alone. Now, how the French didn't
manage to capture champagne, I don't know. Well, we're going to, well, hold on
there. They did actually. We're going to hear and I'll record a bit about it.
Yeah, but we call California wine champagne. I don't know how we're getting away
with that. Well, maybe you shouldn't. Yeah, somebody should be taking you to the
WTO. We're not proposing that on this program, I have to say. Rachel, do you buy
loads? You've just been in Europe. When you got back in, was there loads? I've
spent seven weeks in Switzerland, which is a paradise for a lot of things,
including chocolate. And you don't, I mean, I don't buy Toblerone there either
because there's so many other great local chocolates to buy. This little report
is going to be super interesting. OK. This whole issue. Let's hear it now. Let's
hear it now. This is about Toblerone having through with the Matterhorn Mountain
Peak from its packaging after some, and also move some of its production from
Switzerland to Slovakia. The Swiss don't allow national symbols to be used to
promote milk based products that are not made exclusively in Switzerland. This
isn't, as Peter said, the first time this sort of thing has taken place. Here's
our reporter Matt Lyons. Toblerone, the famous triangular chocolate ever since
its founding in 1908, has always been produced in Switzerland's capital Bern.
Soon that will no longer be the case as some production moves to Slovakia and
with it goes the right to use the Matterhorn on its labelling, with Swiss law
banning the use of national symbols on products not made in the country. Less
than an hour's drive south from Bern is the town of Gruyere, famous, of course,
for the cheese of the same name. Last week, however, a US court ruled that
Gruyere is a generic style of cheese and can come from anywhere, not just the
town. The name is still protected in Europe, even though the French have jostled
their way in, securing protection for French Gruyere cheese alongside the Swiss.
Here's Hervé Allin, who organises cheese tastings in Paris. That's a pity. They
only have confusion, I think, for the consumer between the real Gruyere that is
made with raw milk, with local races or very beautiful cheeses that has an
identity and preserve the traditions. And we will find some, I'd say, not so
good cheeses made with pasteurised milk with not a lot of taste and not a lot of
identity. Champagne, Prosecco and Bordeaux, all wines given protected status,
providing a guarantee to consumers that the product they're buying is the real
thing and not just a knockoff. Last year, after sales of English wine soared,
those produced in the county of Sussex were also granted the same status. Jamie
Everett is from Rathfinney Wines. It means it's grown from grapes in Sussex,
with our excellent soils, excellent weather. So that's the first side of it. The
second side is quality. More than 3,000 products are on the EU register of
protected food names, ranging from Basmati rice from India to Napa Valley wine
from California and redbush tea from South Africa. It's been estimated that
having a protected name more than doubles the value of a product, with the total
value of the market standing at $80 billion, according to one report by the
European Commission. So it's no surprise brands and manufacturers cherish their
ability to promote where their products are made. That makes sense, doesn't it,
Rachel? If it doubles the value of your brand, protect, protect away. Yeah, I
mean, there is a massive amount of information debate and so on about just this
stuff, you know, the World Trade Organization rules and disputes and so on. But
I must say I found the Toblerone question particularly interesting because of
the Swissness of it all. I know Switzerland very well. I lived there for four
years. And it's a country I admire greatly. And they've got this tremendous
sense of national identity without any enormous effort. You know, everybody
signs into it psychologically. So it's not at all surprising that if you're
going to that they have these Swissness rules and that they will be imposed and
that people will not resent them. Well, Peter, we don't have much time left. But
briefly, you're not going to stop buying Toblerone, are you, if you remove the
Matterhorn Mountain Peak now from the labeling? I hope not. It is a very good
product. That's why it's survived so well and thrives over so many years. Also,
why couldn't they keep some production in Switzerland? I think they're being
very foolish about that. No, but they are. They are keeping some. They're moving
some, but they're keeping some there. Yeah. Well, then they should be able to
use the Matterhorn. Swiss are quite a regimented people still. Break the rule
and you've got to do something different. I know. It's a pretty tough rule.
There we go. We're going to end business matters. It's always a delight to have
Peter and Rachel on together. I am now going to ponder my retirement with those
questions that Peter has. What about if we did a podcast together? I could just
throw this BBC lark away, do something useful with my life. Peter, you up for
it? No, I like being on the BBC. You want to leave, you leave. I'm staying here.
OK, well, thank you for that. I'm now unemployed. That is it for Business
Matters. Back same time, same place tomorrow. This is the BBC World Service on
the road with the Health Wagon. Our mission statement is to provide quality care
to the medically uninsured here in the Appalachian Mountains. People are having
to choose between their medicine, food and a place to live. We do not bill
anyone. We're totally... We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third party services and platforms. And the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds. About the research, drug trials and challenges of finding
a treatment. The newsroom is next. This is the BBC.