TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at midnight. This is Tina Ritchie. A year after President Putin
launched his full-scale invasion of Ukraine, Russia has again faced condemnation
at the United Nations. More than 140 countries voted to back a call for Moscow
to pull its troops out, but several, including China, abstained. Police in
Northern Ireland are investigating whether dissident Republicans were behind the
shooting of an off-duty officer in Oma. The disgraced Hollywood mogul Harvey
Weinstein has been sentenced to an additional 16 years in prison for raping a
woman. The Justice Secretary Dominic Raab says he wants a new law which will
compel convicted criminals to attend court for sentencing. And tributes for one
of the legends of sports commentary. John Matson, who captured the highs and the
lows of football's greatest moments, has died. The war between Russia and
Ukraine has entered its second year after countries around the world marked the
first anniversary of President Putin's full-scale invasion with a major show of
support for Kiev at the United Nations in New York. A motion calling for Russia
to immediately withdraw its troops from Ukraine was overwhelmingly backed by 141
votes. Just seven countries opposed it, while there were 32 abstentions. Our UN
correspondent Nedar Taufik reports from New York. In this symbolic hall, the
one-year anniversary of the war was marked with a resolution calling for a just
and lasting peace. The vote showed where countries of the world stood, but also
how little positions have changed since the first time the General Assembly
condemned Russia's invasion in March. Nevertheless, nearly three-quarters of the
world body has consistently supported Ukraine. The country's foreign minister,
Dimitro Kuleba, said he was satisfied with the vote and the message sent was
clear. While the U.S.'s U.N. Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield hailed the vote
as historic. These 141 countries reiterated a clear demand to Russia. Withdraw.
Withdraw immediately, completely and unconditionally from Ukraine's
internationally recognized territory. Only a handful of countries voted against
it, including Belarus, North Korea and Syria. India and South Africa, along with
Russia's most powerful ally, China, were among those that abstained. It's the
fourth time Beijing has done so on such measures, despite its so-called no-
limits partnership with Russia and this week's visit of China's top diplomat to
Moscow. China's representative to the U.N., Dai Bing, told the hall that the
international community should focus on facilitating peace talks and criticized
countries arming Ukraine. When it's into the Ukraine crisis, brutal facts offer
an ample proof that sending weapons will not bring peace. Adding fuel to the
fire will only exacerbate tensions. Later, the U.N. Security Council will meet,
just as it did exactly on this day one year ago. Then, their meeting was only an
hour underway when President Putin announced that a special military operation
in Ukraine had begun. Ministers, including the Foreign Secretary James Cleverley
and the U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken, will urge others to support
Ukraine for as long as it takes. Four people have been arrested after a
500-meter Ukrainian flag was painted on the road outside the Russian embassy in
West London. The campaign group, led by Donkeys, said it wanted to remind
President Putin of Kiev's right to self-determination. It's understood that the
police officer seriously injured in a shooting in County Terone warned children
who were nearby to run away as the attack was happening. Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell was off duty and had just finished coaching a children's
football training session when he was targeted outside a sports centre in Oma
last night. He remains critically ill in hospital. Three men have been arrested.
Police are keeping an open mind about the motive but say the dissident
Republican group, the new IRA, is the primary focus of their inquiry. From Oma,
our island correspondent Chris Page has been following the day's events. This
huge crime scene takes in football pitches, a running track and a pavilion.
Police officers wearing white forensic suits have been searching for evidence
all day after a Wednesday night sports session ended in horror. John Caldwell is
a father who was coaching young people but he was shot because he's a detective.
Assistant Chief Constable Mark McCoon has recounted how his colleague was
attacked. John was finishing up. He was accompanied by his young son putting
footballs into the boot of his car. When two gunmen appeared, fired multiple
shots, John ran a short distance and as he fell to the ground the gunmen
continued to fire shots at him. At this time there were many other young people,
children, awaiting pickup by their parents. New children ran for cover in sheer
terror. Peter Gormley belongs to a local running club and was at the sports
complex when he heard the gunfire. Somebody said that's fireworks but I thought
no that's actually shots with 8 or 9. Then somebody said someone with a gun you
know so everyone sort of panicked. I went down with another guy and got the
young people's coaches to get them into each group you know and as safe as they
could be you know but yeah a lot of people running up the grass in Bankbend, no
dethine get away but didn't know where to go. The last time a police officer was
murdered in Northern Ireland it happened in this town. Constable Ronan Kerr was
killed by a bomb under his car 12 years ago. But people in Oma are determined
that violence shouldn't define this place. They've spoken out strongly against
the gunmen. Gobsmacked this affected a lot of people local here in the town,
affected businesses, people's feelings and raised tensions. The fact that this
happened at all, it's archaic. We don't need this kind of carry on around our
town now anymore. Words can't explain it like it's awful, just awful. What sort
of people do things like that? You know it doesn't make sense. You can't come to
terms with that at all. The shooting has happened during another time of
political instability. The power sharing devolved. Government at Stormont hasn't
been fully operating for more than a year because of a crisis relating to Brexit
trading arrangements. The five biggest Stormont parties have issued a joint
statement condemning the attack in Oma. Liam Kelly from the Police Federation
says London should step in to give officers here more funding to deal with
paramilitary groups. The policing budget has unfortunately been slashed over the
last number of years. That's not going to help the police in dealing with this.
So I mean I would call today that those in power, particularly in Westminster at
the moment because we've no devolved government in operation in Northern
Ireland, is that they actually give the Chief Constable both the funding and the
resources he needs to keep our community and to keep our police officers safe.
Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is being treated in hospital in
Londonderry where his condition is said to be critical but stable. The men
who've been arrested are 38, 45 and 47. They were detained in County Tyrone and
are being questioned at a police station in Belfast. The Police Service of
Northern Ireland said that despite the rare nature of these attacks in modern
times, all of its officers were working against a backdrop of substantial
threats. Our Home Affairs correspondent in Belfast, Julian O'Neill, considers
whether the risks posed by paramilitary organisations are growing again. Several
small, dissident Republican groups emerged out of the provisional IRA and unlike
their predecessor, are violent opponents of the political settlement which ended
the troubles 25 years ago. The biggest and most active group is the new IRA
whose main areas of operations are Londonderry and Tyrone. Previous security
assessments estimated it had about 100 members prepared to commit acts of
terrorism. Its support base was said to number around 500. Attacks have occurred
only sporadically. After it murdered the journalist, Lyra McKee, during rioting
in 2019, the new IRA was put on the back foot by several successful security
operations run by MI5 leading to the first reduction in the terrorist threat
level in Northern Ireland in a decade. What followed has been a reorganisation
of the group's leadership and after a lull in activity, it re-emerged last
November with a bomb attack on a police patrol car. The shooting in Oma is the
most serious incident in many years and demonstrates that while a small
organisation with little support, it retains the capacity to strike against
police officers. Government plans to establish an independent regulator of men's
football in England have been given a cautious welcome. The move was recommended
in a fan review last year to make clubs more financially resilient and to give
supporters more say on how they're run. The Premier League said it was vital
that regulation did not damage the game. Here's our sports editor Dan Rowan. The
Premier League may enjoy global popularity but English footballs had to tackle
mounting problems in recent years. From historic clubs like Bury going bust to
the threat of a breakaway European super league and today the Culture Secretary
Lucy Fraser confirmed a major overhaul of the way that the game is run. We are
bringing forward today the biggest shake-up in football since the rules were
first formulated. An independent regulator who's going to oversee and ensure
financial stability. The key recommendation of a fan-led review, the new
regulator will issue clubs with annual licenses that depend on a sound business
plan, bring in a tougher owners and directors test and empower fans. With most
of its clubs technically insolvent, the Football League also wants a greater
share of the wealth from the top of the sport and the regulator will have the
power to step in to resolve what's becoming a long-running disagreement over
financial redistribution. But the Premier League chief executive Richard Masters
told me the regulator must not deter investment. We as football authorities need
to rebuild trust. I don't think English football has anything to be embarrassed
about. This needs to be a very precise regulatory tool, not a sledgehammer
otherwise it might take football sideways or even backwards rather than
forwards. While some are wary of this reform, others wanted it to come sooner
and go further. What is certain is that English football has taken a step in a
new direction. The Labour leader, Seqir Stama, has promised that if his party
wins power at the next election, the UK will have the highest growth in the G7
by the end of its first term. In a speech in Manchester he said the pledge was
one of five missions that his government would prioritise. Our chief political
correspondent Nick Erdley is in the city and watched Seqir's speech. There is an
increasing confidence in the Labour party that they can form the next
government. It can be seen in today's announcement five missions for Labour to
pursue in power, some lasting into a second term part of what Seqir Stama called
a decade of renewal. There is a lack of detail about how these headlines would
all be achieved. We're told there will be more over the next few months. But
Seqir is promising the following. To make the NHS stronger for the future, to
make streets safer, improve childcare and opportunity, make the UK a green
energy superpower and on growth a tangible target, to secure the highest
sustained growth in the G7 by the end of Labour's first term. What we need has
become crystal clear. Growth. Economic growth is the oxygen for our ambitions.
So let me announce the economic mission of the next Labour government. By the
end of Labour's first term, we will deliver the highest sustained growth in the
G7. Pledges like these are, of course, easier said than done. Both Labour and
the Conservatives are now offering economic growth as a central tenet and to
make the health service fit for the future. Seqir argued that there had been a
lack of long-term vision under the Conservatives, though, and that the
government's approach needed to move beyond sticking plasters. In response, the
Conservatives said the Labour was offering nothing new and Seqir couldn't be
trusted not to change his mind. Seqir's internal critics and momentum hit out at
the Labour leader for dropping other pledges on public ownership he'd made
during his leadership campaign. The UN's Middle East envoy has held meetings in
Gaza as part of efforts to calm escalating tensions between the Palestinians and
the Israelis. A general strike was held today by Palestinians after yesterday's
Israeli raid in the occupied West Bank that left 11 people dead and more than 80
injured. From Jerusalem, here's our Middle East correspondent, Tom Bateman. The
raid in Nablus was the deadliest by Israeli forces in the occupied West Bank for
nearly two decades. Palestinian leaders have demanded international protection
given the number of civilians among the dead and wounded. But the Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu today praised Israeli forces and vowed, in his
words, to hit terrorism hard. It has raised further fears of spiralling
violence, especially with the return of Palestinian rocket fire and Israeli
airstrikes on the Gaza Strip during last night. The United Nations envoy to the
region tore Wennesland, travelled to Gaza and met leaders from the Palestinian
militant group Hamas, while the UN's Secretary General, Antonio Guterres, said
preventing further escalation must be an immediate priority. The disgraced
Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein has been jailed for a further 16 years for
raping and sexually assaulting a woman a decade ago. The 70-year-old was already
serving 23 years behind bars for a separate conviction. Before today's
sentencing, Weinstein begged the judge not to give him a life term, insisting
he'd never met his victim. Our correspondent Sophie Long was at the hearing in
Los Angeles. Once one of the most powerful figures in the film industry, Harvey
Weinstein sat in court in a crumpled prison jumpsuit, unable to stand as he was
sentenced to a further 16 years in prison. His victim cried as she told the
court how his brutal attack had stripped her of her confidence, ruined her
career and left her heartbroken and alone. She said no sentence could remove the
damage, but the maximum term would restore other victims' faith in the justice
system. Weinstein insisted he was innocent, that he didn't know her and accused
her of lying to the court. He asked the judge not to give him a life sentence.
At 70 years old and in failing health, it is likely he will spend the rest of
his life behind bars. Caitlin Delaney, one of Weinstein's many accusers, spoke
outside court. These cases are often tried later after they've happened and
these things don't happen in front of other people. So to get a conviction here
and a strong sentence, so I'm very proud of all of us who have been speaking
about what Harvey Weinstein did and supporting the women who testified.
Hopefully we'll make it harder to get away with these kinds of crimes. But the
former movie mogul has not given up. His lawyer said they would appeal before
the day was out. The former singer R Kelly has been given a 20-year prison term
by a judge in Chicago for charges including producing images of child sex abuse.
But this latest sentence will be served at the same time as his previous term of
30 years for sex trafficking and racketeering, meaning that he'll only spend an
extra year in jail. Without an early release, he'll remain in prison until he's
in his mid-80s. The American actor Alec Baldwin has pleaded not guilty to the
involuntary manslaughter of a cinematographer who died on the set of one of his
films. Helena Hutchins was hit in the chest by a prop gun that Mr Baldwin fired
while making the Western rust. His lawyers have previously said he had no reason
to believe there was a live bullet inside. The Justice Secretary Dominic Raab
has told the family of a murder victim that he's working to bring in a law to
make convicted criminals appear in court for sentencing and that those that
don't will face longer jail terms. He had a meeting with the family of Zara
Elina who was killed by a stranger last year near her home in East London. Our
Home Affairs correspondent June Kelly reports. The Justice Secretary revealed
his plans during a meeting with Farah Nas, the aunt of Zara Elina. Misalina's
killer, Jordan McSweeney, who was jailed for 38 years, refused to attend his
sentencing hearing and was condemned as spineless by the judge. Dominic Raab
told the BBC that it was possible that some criminals might have to be
manhandled from their cells into the dock. I wouldn't rule that out but
fundamentally if a perpetrator is not willing to come and face the judge and
hear the sentence handed down by the court then I think we should be looking at
increasing the sentence as an aggravating factor. Farah Nas described the impact
of the refusal by her niece's killer to hear personal statements about what he'd
done to their family. When we learnt that he had the right not to attend it felt
like a slap in the face. Like the murderer gets to have that power, he gets a
license to kill Zara because of failings in probation and then he gets the right
to not even face his judgement. Dominic Raab said enforcing tougher rules and
penalties was the very least victims deserved, describing it as a basic
principle of British justice. A safety review is being carried out on a
decongestant which is widely used in over-the-counter medicines because of
concerns about rare but potentially serious side effects. Officials are worried
that products containing pseudoephedrine could affect blood vessels to the brain
but drug regulators insist the risks are extremely low. Our health correspondent
Michelle Roberts has more. People take pseudoephedrine to relieve congestion. It
comes in sprays, liquids and tablets and is sometimes mixed with other medicines
for coughs and colds or allergies. It can help clear blocked airways by reducing
blood flow in swollen nasal passages but it can affect vessels in the brain too
and this can lead to some rare side effects with products already including
warnings inside packs about these. One is a brain blood vessel condition called
posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome which can cause blurred vision and
seizures. Another is reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome which can
cause sudden severe thunderclap headaches that are sometimes a sign of a
dangerous brain bleed. Laura Wilson from the Royal Pharmaceutical Society said
people shouldn't be alarmed. Medsins in general are very carefully assessed
before they're made available to the public but it's only right that if rare
side effects do emerge that they are assessed by the authorities and then
decisions made about the availability but we would encourage patients if you
have any concerns or questions to please speak to a health professional such as
the pharmacist for advice. In the UK people can report any suspected side
effects to the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency. It says
public safety is a top priority and that it keeps the safety of all medicines
under close review to ensure the benefits outweigh any risks. One of the
candidates to replace Nicola Sturgeon as Scotland's first minister, Kate Forbes,
has said she's heart sore about the backlash sparked by her comments on gay
marriage. Some of the Finance Secretary's backers withdrew their support after
she revealed she wouldn't have voted for same sex unions if she'd been an MSP
when the legislation was passed in 2014. Ms Forbes, a committed Christian, said
she never intended to cause hurt and would protect the rights of everyone in
Scotland if she became SNP leader. The Environment Secretary to raise coffee has
said consumers should cherish home grown produce such as turnips while other
vegetables remain in short supply. Responding to an urgent question in the House
of Commons, she said shortages of fresh produce could last for up to a month.
Four supermarkets have imposed limits on the number of some items customers can
buy. Here's our business correspondent Theo Leggett. Hot weather, cold weather
and the high cost of energy have all been given as reasons for the lack of some
fresh fruit and vegetables in the supermarkets. However, it's also clear that UK
retailers have been suffering more than their European counterparts. In the
Commons, Terese Coffey rejected the suggestion that this might be linked to
Brexit and instead blamed the type of fixed price contracts used by British
store chains. She was then asked whether the country ought to be less reliant on
imported food. It's important to make sure that we cherish the specialisms that
we have in this country. A lot of people would be eating turnips right now
rather than thinking necessarily about aspects of lettuce and tomatoes and
similar. But I'm conscious that consumers want a year-round choice and that is
what our supermarkets and food producers and growers around the world try to
satisfy. But the government's position has been criticised by Justin King, a
former chief executive of Sainsbury's. He said the agricultural sector had been
significantly disrupted by Brexit and added that Whitehall's unwillingness to
help farmers cope with soaring energy costs limited how much produce could be
grown in heated greenhouses in the UK. This, he said, had left the country
uniquely exposed to imports at this time of year. Figures on school absence show
almost a quarter of pupils in England have missed 10% of lessons so far this
year, partly because of higher levels of illness this winter. Here's our
education editor, Bramith Jefferies. High levels of flu and colds this winter
and Covid still in circulation haven't helped with school attendance. The
government is tracking pupils missing school more closely than ever before in
England. So today it's published data for the school year from last September to
mid-February. This shows overall 23% of pupils have missed at least 10% of
school. That's a rate of persistent absence almost twice as high as autumn 2019
before Covid was widespread. When you look at secondary schools, the picture is
even more worrying, with 28% of pupils persistently absent this year so far.
Coming off the back of several years of disruption, this will add to concerns
that for some, the connection to school has been damaged. MPs on the Education
Select Committee are due to begin an inquiry into the issues in the coming
weeks. In the city, the 100 share index ended the day down 30 points at 7,908.
On Wall Street, the Dow Jones closed up 109 points at 33,154. On the currency
markets, the pound is trading at $1.20.2 against the euro, sterling is at 1 euro
13.4, making a euro worth 88.2 pence. David Bowie's estate says the musician has
taken his rightful place among cultural icons after his personal archive was
bought by the V&A Museum. More than 80,000 items including costumes, instruments
and hand-written lyrics will be available for fans to view from 2025 at a new
venue in East London. Our music correspondent Mark Savage has more. The rock
star we know as David Bowie did not exist. He was invented by David Jones, a
young musician from South London with an incredible ability for metamorphosis.
Now, seven years after his death, the V&A Museum has acquired Bowie's
extraordinary archive, permanently for everyone to see. From the famous Ziggy
Stardust costumes to the stylophone he played on Space Oddity. Mary Finnegan was
his landlady when he wrote that song in 1969. He sat in my kitchen and said,
would you like to hear my latest song? And so me and the kids said yes please.
And he sang Space Oddity and played the stylophone part. And that was the first
time that we heard that song. After that breakout single, Bowie's musical
curiosity and theatrical performances inspired generations, as his biographer
Tom Haigler explains. Michael Jackson apparently went to all his shows in LA in
74. He was at Young Lad about 14, 15 that time. And Bowie went back home with
him and the young Michael quizzed him for most of the night about the
choreography. So his influence on Black America on everybody, so incredible.
Fans will get their chance to study Bowie when the collection opens in 2025.
Mark Savage reporting. The football commentator John Matson has died at the age
of 77. Known affectionately as Motti, he covered 10 World Cups, 10 European
Championships and 29 FA Cup Finals for the BBC before retiring in 2018. The
Prince of Wales, who's the president of the FA, said Matson was the voice of
football. Our sports correspondent Andy Swiss looks back at his 50-year career.
Here's Gascoigne. Oh, brilliant. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. His voice was as distinctive
as his sheepskin coat. John Matson joined the BBC in 1968, but his big break
came four years later when he commentated on a famous FA Cup win for Hereford
against Newcastle. What a goal! What a goal! Radford the scorer! Ronnie Radford!
And the crowd are invading the pitch. Ronnie Radford's goal, he later said,
changed his life. When I see it again, as I have hundreds of times, I still
think to myself, please go in, don't hit the post. Because if that hadn't
nestled in the Newcastle net, no, I wouldn't be here now. Matson went on to
commentate on nearly two and a half thousand games, including 10 World Cups, and
his enthusiastic style and encyclopedic knowledge turned him into a household
name. The BBC's director general Tim Davie described him as the voice of a
footballing generation, while Match of the Day presenter Gary Lineker also paid
tribute. He just always pitched it right, I felt. He got the big goals right. He
was almost an anorak, if you like, and I think you've got to be that a little
bit to be a commentator, certainly of his ilk. John Matson's final BBC
commentary was at Crystal Palace in 2018, after which he was applauded by the
supporters. A fitting tribute to one of football's most famous voices.
Manchester United have joined Arsenal in the last 16 of the Europa League, after
coming from behind to knock out Barcelona at Old Trafford. Second half goals
from the Brazilians Fred and Anthony gave United a 2-1 win on the night, meaning
they went through 4-3 on aggregate. And now for a first look at the morning
papers, where many are marking the first anniversary of Russia's invasion of
Ukraine, or as The Times puts it, Ukraine's year of blood. It reports that Rishi
Sunak will today call on NATO members to supply Kiev with former Soviet fighter
jets. The Guardian focuses on the devastation in the city of Mariyupol, which it
calls perhaps the bloodiest and most shocking chapter of Russia's brutal war.
The continued defiance of Ukraine receives praise in the metro, under the
headline Heroes Never Give In. The Archbishop of Canterbury has written an
article in The Daily Telegraph in which he argues that Russia must not be
crushed in any future peace deal. Both The Daily Mail and The Daily Express lead
with comments from the Queen consort for authors to resist curbs on their
freedom of expression. The Mail describes Camilla as wading into the row about
the rewriting of Roald Dahl's stories. The Sun claims that Vernon Kay is set to
replace Ken Bruce on Radio 2. And The Daily Star mocks a device from the
government minister to raise coffee on how to get round salad shortages with its
headline Let Them Eat Turnips. Its front page offers a useful cut-out and keep
turnip for every peasant. The headlines again. The United Nations General
Assembly has voted overwhelmingly to condemn Russia's full-scale invasion of
Ukraine as the war enters its second year, more than 140 countries back to
resolution calling for the immediate withdrawal of Moscow's troops. Police say
they're focusing on dissident Republicans as they try to identify masked men who
shot an off-duty officer in Oma. A court in Los Angeles has sentenced the
disgraced Hollywood Phil mogul Harvey Weinstein to 16 more years in prison for
rape and sexual assault. A new laws proposed by the Justice Secretary Dominic
Raab could see criminals who refused to attend court for sentencing handed
longer prison terms. BBC News. And the news was read by Tina Ritchie. Now let's
take a look at the weather forecast. Here's Chris Fawkes. Hello, good morning.
On Thursday most parts of the country enjoyed some sunshine. However, after a
sunny start in Scotland we did see the weather turn a lot cloudier through the
afternoon with outbreaks of rain and some fairly strong winds arriving through
the evening time. Let's see a gust up to 48mph in the Northern Isles. Those very
strongest winds are beginning to ease away, but we do have a band of rain in
Scotland at the moment that is pushing its way southwards. The rain not really
amounting to very much. It is mostly going to be quite light and patchy, but it
will eventually reach parts of Northern Ireland and the far north of England
overnight as well. For Wales, the Midlands, East Anglia, southern counties of
England. At the moment the skies are quite clear, so a touch of frost developing
in places, lowest temperatures about minus three. But it will turn to turn a bit
cloudier towards the very end of the night and so that will tend to lift the
frost in all, but the far south of England and perhaps southern parts of Wales,
where it might actually be quite a nice sunrise to start the day on Friday.
Friday weather wise, across most of England and Wales we're looking at a rather
cloudy start to the day with a few patches of light rain falling from that
cloud. Through the day though, it's going to tend to turn brighter across most
of England and Wales, the cloud latest to break up across the far south of
England and southern parts of Wales. You'll have to be patient to see much in
the way of sunshine here. Best of the sunshine for Northern England, but there
could be a few showers running into the northeast and there will be certainly
some cold winds developing across eastern areas of England through the day.
Temperatures, England and Wales generally speaking, quite close to average for
the time of year. We're looking at highs through the afternoon of between say
seven and ten degrees Celsius. For Northern Ireland, a cloudy start to the day.
Again, there could be an odd spit of rain from that week weather front, but the
afternoon looks drier and much sunnier as well. Temperatures about ten degrees
in Belfast. In Scotland, we should start the day on a bright note with some
sunny spells, but there is a risk of a few showers from time to time across
northern and eastern areas of the country and we'll have those cold winds
blowing across eastern Scotland as well. Now through the weekend it's a largely
dry picture, but the winds will be quite chilly across eastern areas, mostly dry
with cloud coming and going interspersed by sunny spells. Nicely swivelled.
Thanks Chris. Now, Book of the Week. Today in Catherine Rundell's engaging
biography of John Dunn, a tricky start to a relationship that fuelled some of
the most desire-filled poetry in English. Blake Ritson reads, Super infinite.
Who was she? Anne Moore. The very young woman with whom the complicated,
furious, funny poet was so in love. We know very little. We do not even know how
she preferred to spell her own name. As with the capriciousness typical of the
period, she is spelled Anne both with and without an e. It was her second name,
though, that Dunn played on over and over. As much more loving, as Moore sad. He
first met her, the third daughter of Sir George Moore, when she was only about
fourteen years old and he was working as a secretary in Thomas Edgerton's
household. She had been sent to London to learn the ways of the city and the
court and something in her face or manner bludgeoned John Dunn in the heart.
Given her father's wealth, she was likely to have been fashionable and her
clothes would have been good. Stitching the labyrinth needle lace was the rage
and necklines were having a moment of extremes, either rising high to the chin
or scooped so low they skated close to the nipple. But his poetry never
describes her clothes or her body. Dunn's metaphors are vivid, wild, evocative
and potent, but they are strikingly unspecific. It never occurred to him to tell
us if she curved at the hip or jutted at the collarbone or was taller than him.
Presumably it was not what was important. The hunger and the body itself were
what mattered. Perhaps to look for Anne in Dunn's verse is to misunderstand what
the poems are doing. They're not representations of her, but representations of
him. Him watching her, needing her, inventing for her. They are trumpet blasts
across a hard land, more than they are portraits. In a valediction of My Name in
a Window written in 1599, Dunn imagines etching his name with a diamond ring on
a window and his lover seeing her own reflection and his name intermingled. It
is much that glass should be as all confessing and through shine as I. It is
more that it shows thee to thee and clear reflects thee to thine eye. But all
such rules, love's magic can undo. Here you see me and I am you. Her willingness
to defy her father was a remarkable thing. She must have had in her a flash of
daring in a world that insisted on obedience. She could only have met Dunn in
secret and secret places were not easy to find. They might have been able to
collide under the plausible deniability of public spaces, parks, popular walks,
church. They might have attended events in the evening. Pageants, which could be
so crowded that silk-clad bodies would press against each other. She took vast
risks for him, larger than he took for her. Spurred on by desire or perhaps by
Dunn's urgent importuning or by the wild optimism of youth, she risked gossip,
scandal and perhaps at the very end, pregnancy. They may well have been lovers
in the weeks before they wed, hiding behind insouciant faces and very careful
timing. She gave a great, recklessly romantic leap into the dark. The landing
was not to be a soft one. Was he worth the sacrifice when she foresaw the
thousand easier futures that surrounded her? The alternatives would have been
right in front of her. She could have aimed for a life more like that of her
cousin by marriage, Elizabeth, who had that year been married off to Baron
Hastings with all the castles and gardens and wall hangings embroidered with
unicorns that that involved. What was done that she decided to risk her father's
wrath in order to share his days, his small income, his bed? If he took her to
bed like he wrote, if he knew how to render bodily his poetry, then he was worth
sacrificing all the wall hangings in England for. To read him, to read all of
his love poems together is to feel your self-change, for his is a passion which
acknowledges the strangeness you are born with. His best poetry is a triumphant
call of desire, sincerity, joke, all bound into one. It's there, for instance,
in a valediction-forbidding morning. The lovers are imagined as the two feet of
a pair of mathematical compasses joined eternally at the base. If they be two,
they are too so. As stiff twin compasses are two, thy soul, the fixed foot,
makes no show to move, but doth, if thother do. And though it in the centre sit
yet when thother, far doth roam, it leans and hearkens after it, and grows erect
as it comes home. It is so extravagantly witty and so riotously plays only by
its own rules. It needed to be clever, because he demands that sex be
intelligent. It's the poem of a man who has the temerity and invention to see
the human condition in a piece of metal. It loves the body, because Dun, unlike
so many of the highbrow poets who went before him, never pretended not to have a
body. Grows erect as it comes home is a pun so obvious it might as well be a
little sketch of a penis. But it is fundamental to his love poetry that the body
Dun imagines isn't just a body, it transforms and becomes simultaneously other
things – a world, a state, a city, a planetary sweep. The lover looks at the
woman in the good morrow and sees a world atlas. Where can we find two fitter
hemispheres without sharp north, without declining west? In to his mistress
going to bed, the woman's girdle becomes a constellation of stars, and her body
is the entire world. Off with that girdle-like heaven-zoneed blistering, but a
far fairer world encompassing. And again, my kingdom safeliest when with one man
manned. And the man in the sun rising chides the rising sun, declares, She all
states and all princes I. She becomes the world. Since thy duties be to warm the
world, that's done in warming us. Shine here to us and thou art everywhere. This
bed thy centre is, these walls thy sphere. Some of that woman as state, woman as
world is Dun working in a tradition, but some of it was personal. Dun's
relentless imagination was his single most constant feature. His mind had
ceaselessness built into it. It was to be throughout his life, a sight of new
images, new theology, new doubts. Even those who disliked his work acknowledged
that he was a writer who had erupted through the old into the new. But the
always of that imagination must have been exhausting. For a mind like that, sex,
real sex, true sex, would allow a singleness to hush the multitudinous mind.
It's why so much of Dun's imagery around sex is so totalising. The man and woman
become one. The woman becomes a state, a country, a planet. Sex for Dun and
those like him. Permission for those who watch the world with such feverish care
to turn one person into the world and to watch only them. It was a transforming
of his constant seeking for knowledge. To adore and to devour and to be devoured
is its own kind of focus, a gasp of a different kind of oxygen. And so they
married. The wedding took place about three weeks before Christmas in 1601,
according to Dun. It was very small, no more than five guests. After the
wedding, Anne returned to her family home, Losely Park, in the countryside with
her oblivious father as if nothing had happened, and Dun went back to his
lodgings to wait and hope. To hope for what, beyond a good moment to break the
news, is hard to say. The moment didn't come. So in the end, on the 2nd of
February, almost two months after the wedding day, he wrote a letter and sent it
to his father-in-law via the 9th Earl of Northumberland, Henry Percy. It wasn't
by any reckoning a good letter. Dun was aiming for both humility and authority.
He instead succeeded in sounding at once overconfident and mildly unhinged. I
knew my present estate less than fit for her. I knew, yet I knew not why, that I
stood not right in your opinion. I knew that to have given any intimation of it
had been to impossibilitate the whole matter. I know this letter shall find you
full of passion, but I know no passion can alter your reason and wisdom to which
I adventure to commend these particulars. That it is irimediably done. He spells
it, the O-N-N-E, a fantastically inappropriate pun on his own name. That if you
incense my lord, you destroy her and me. That it is easy to give us happiness,
and that my endeavors and industry, if it please you to prosper them, may soon
make me somewhat worthier of her. It's multiple requests rolled up in one.
Daughter and a job and forgiveness. From the point of view of George Moore, with
his notoriously quick temper and his aspirations to nobility, it was a disaster,
and might have formed a great alliance, have given him titled in-laws with whom
to socially machinate. Now she had bound herself to a scribbling reprobate
without property and with a dead religious traitor of her brother. Sir George
went immediately to Dunn's employer, Thomas Edgerton. Anne was still a minor, so
Dunn had broken cannon law. The case went to the city's commissioners. Dunn was
summarily dismissed from Edgerton's household, and to his bewilderment, thrown
into the fleet prison to await further investigation. The fleet prison was
simultaneously disgusting and expensive. At debtor's prison, it didn't have the
dignity and royal tinge of the tower. It stood on the banks of the River Fleet
in East London, and had a grill looking onto the street through which prisoners
could beg for arms. Prisons were profit-making enterprises. You paid for each
turn of the key, paid to have your irons removed, paid for your food and
lodging. Dunn's brother had died in one prison. Now he was in another, and like
Henry, he was growing increasingly desperately unwell. On the 11th of February,
locked in his cell, he wrote a more desperate plea to Sir George. He no longer
stood upon his pride. And though perchance you intend not utter destruction, but
the way through which I fall towards it is so headlong that being thus pushed I
shall soon be at bottom. I have no refuge but that of mercy which I beg of him,
my lord, and you. This new, humbler letter asked more to think of Anne. Dunn's
fall from nuptial rebellion to obeisance was very swift, fast enough to overturn
his whole understanding of what you could and couldn't talk your way around. Sir
George sent word in return that he would leave the matter up to Edgerton, who
ordered that Dunn should be allowed to return to his lodgings. He stayed there,
under house arrest, in dark midwinter, while the legality of his marriage to
Anne was decided. Dunn's health began to improve, but his life was still in
chaos. While the High Commission deliberated, he continued to send out flocks of
letters. Some were to Sir George. In one, he reiterated his passion for Anne and
begged permission to send a note to her. Very slowly, George Moore began to come
round. On the 27th of April 1602, the Court of Audience declared Dunn's marriage
good and sufficient. It was a very unambiguous victory. A true and pure
marriage, it was declared, had been contracted between the said Anne Moore alias
Dunn and John Dunn. Dunn was at last allowed to take up his wife. Super Infinite
by Catherine Rundle was read by Blake Ritson and concludes tomorrow. The
abridger was Richard Hamilton and the producer Allegra McElroy. Not infinite,
but quite long tonight, given the weather, the shipping forecast, next. The
shipping forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast
Guard Agency at 0015 on Friday 24th February. There are warnings of gales in
Viking, North at Sira, South at Sira, Forties, Dogger, Fisher, German Bight,
Plymouth, Biscay and Fair Isle. The general synopsis at 1800. Low, north-eastern
Spain 1007. Expected Biscay 1005 by 1800 Friday. The area forecasts for the next
24 hours. Viking, North at Sira, South at Sira, Forties. Westerly or north-
westerly veering northerly, 6 to gale 8, occasionally 5 at first, then
increasing Severe Gale 9 at times in the at Siras. Showers becoming wintry, good
occasionally poor. Cromartie, 4th, Tyne. Westerly or north-westerly veering
northerly, 5 to 7, occasionally 4 in West Cromartie, and West 4th. Rain then
showers, good occasionally moderate. Dogger, Fisher, German Bight. West 5 to 7,
veering north or northwest, 6 to gale 8, perhaps Severe Gale 9 later in Fisher.
Rain then showers, moderate or good, occasionally poor. Humber, Thames. Variable
3 or 4 at first in Thames. Otherwise West or Northwest 4 to 6, veering north 5
to 7 later. Rain, sorry, fair then rain, then showers, moderate or good. Dover,
northeast 4 or 5, backing West 2 to 4, veering north 4 to 6 later. Fair then
rain, then showers later, good, becoming moderate for a time. White, Portland,
northeast 4 to 6, backing North 3 or 4 for a time. Showers later, good
occasionally moderate. Plymouth, North Biscay. Northeasterly 5 to 7,
occasionally gale 8 at first, and 4 later. Showers, good occasionally moderate.
South Biscay, Cyclonic 5 to 7, decreasing 4 at times. Rain, perhaps thundery,
good occasionally poor. Trafalgar, North, backing West or Northwest 3 to 5.
Showers, perhaps thundery, good occasionally moderate. Fitzroy, northeasterly,
becoming cyclonic in South, 4 to 6, occasionally 7 in East, thundery showers,
good occasionally poor. Sol, Lundy, Fastnet, North or Northeast, 4 to 6,
showers, good. Irish Sea, Northwest, 4 to 6, veering Northeast, 3 to 5 later.
Showers, good. Shannon, North veering Northeast, 4 or 5, showers, good. Rockall,
Malin, Hebrides, Bailey. Northwest, 5 to 7, veering North, 3 to 5, becoming
variable 2 to 4 later at Rockall and Bailey. Showers, moderate or good. Fair
Isle, Northwest, 6 to gale 8, veering North, 4 to 6. Showers, becoming wintry,
good occasionally poor. And Faroes, South East Iceland, cyclonic 4 to 6,
becoming variable 2 to 4, except in East Faroes. Wintry showers, good
occasionally poor. Now weather reports from coastal stations for 2300. Tyree,
automatic, Northwest, 5, recent drizzle, 5 miles, 1018, falling slowly.
Stornoway, Northwest by West, 5, slight rain, 16 miles, 1014, now falling.
Lerwick, Northwest, 5, 6 miles, 1004, rising. Wick, automatic, Northwest by
North, 5, 6 miles, 1009, rising slowly. Aberdeen, West by North, 4, recent
drizzle, 27 miles, 1010, falling. Lucas, West, 4, 32 miles, 1013, falling
slowly. Boomer, West, 4, 1013, falling. Bridlington, West, Southwest, 3, 1016,
falling. Sandetti Light Vessel, automatic, North by East, 4, 5 miles, 1018. St
Catherine's Point, automatic, Northeast, 3, 1019, falling more slowly. Jersey,
Northeast, 4, 11 miles, 1017, rising more slowly. Channel Light Vessel,
automatic, North East by East, 6, 1018. Silly, automatic, Northeast by North, 5,
16 miles, 1021, falling slowly. Milford Haven, North, Northeast 1, 27 miles,
1022, falling slowly. Amarpurth, North 1, 24 miles, 1022, falling slowly.
Valley, West, Northwest 2, 11 miles, 1021, falling slowly. Liverpool, Crosby,
West 4, 6 miles, 1019, falling slowly. Valencia, North by East 1, 19 miles,
1025, falling slowly. Ronald's Way, West by North 3, 1019, falling slowly.
Malinhead, Northwest 5, recent drizzle, 3 miles, 1021, falling slowly. And
Macrahanish, automatic, Northwest by West 5, recent precipitation, 5 miles,
1018, falling more slowly. Now the weather forecast for the inshore waters of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland valid for the following 24 hours, issued by
the Met Office at 2300 on Thursday the 23rd of February. The general situation,
the Westerley or North-Westerley airflow currently affecting the United Kingdom,
will gradually veer northerly or north-easterly during the next day or two, as
high pressure to the west of Ireland moves north-eastwards towards northern
Scotland. Most areas will have either occasional rain or showers, especially the
north and the east. Cape Roth to Ratterie Head, including Orkney, West or
Northwest, veering north, 4 to 6. Showers, good, occasionally moderate. Ratterie
Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed, West veering north, 4 to 6. Showers, good,
occasionally moderate. Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby, West 4 or 5, veering north,
5 or 6. Occasional rain, then showers, good, occasionally moderate at first.
Whitby to Gibraltar Point, West 4 or 5, veering northwest, 4 to 6, then north, 5
or 6 later. Occasional rain for a time, then showers, good, occasionally
moderate at first. Gibraltar Point to North-Fawland, variable 2 to 4 at first in
south, otherwise westerly, veering north-westerly 3 to 5, then northerly 4 to 6
later. Fair, then rain, then showers later, good, occasionally moderate. North-
Fawland to Selsea Bill, northerly or north-westerly 3 to 5, decreasing 2 for a
time at first, occasionally 6 later in Far East. Fair, then occasional rain,
then showers later, good, becoming moderate for a time. Selsea Bill to Lime
Regis, northeast, 4 or 5, backing north or northwest, 2 or 3 for a time.
Showers, later, good. Lime Regis to Lands End, including the Isles of Scilly,
north or northeast, 4 or 5, increasing 6 times. Fair, then showers, good. Lands
End to St David's Head, including the Bristol Channel. Northerly or north-
easterly 3 to 5, backing northerly or north-westerly 2 to 4 for a time at first,
and then occasionally 6 later in west. Fair, then showers, good. St David's Head
to Great Ormhead, including St George's Channel. West or northwest, 2 to 4,
veering north or northwest, 4 to 6, then northeast, 3 to 5 later. Occasional
rain, becoming fair later, good occasionally moderate at first. Great Ormhead to
The Mull of Galloway, west or northwest, 3 to 5, veering north or northwest, 4
to 6, then northeast, 3 to 5, later. Occasional rain, becoming fair later, good
occasionally moderate at first. Isle of Man, west or northwest, four or five,
veering north or northwest, four to six, then northeast, three to five, later.
Occasional rain, then fair, good. Lockfoil to Carlingford Lock, west or
northwest, three to five, veering north or northwest, four to six, then
northeast, three or four, later. Showers becoming fair, later. Mull of Galloway
to Mull of Kintyre, including the Firth of Clyde and the North Channel.
Northwesterly four to six, veering northeastly two to four, later. Occasional
rain becoming fair, later. Good, occasionally moderate, at first. Mull of
Kintyre to Ardnumuckham Point, northwest four to six, veering north, three to
five, then veering northeast, later. Occasional rain, then fair, good,
occasionally moderate, at first. Ardnumuckham Point to Cape Roth, northwest,
four to six, veering north, three to five, becoming variable, mainly northeast,
two to four, later. Rain or showers, then fair, good, occasionally moderate, at
first. And finally, Shattlendiles, northwest, six or seven, veering north, five
or six. Showers becoming wintry, later. Good, occasionally poor, later. And that
completes the shipping bulletin, the next on Radio 4 at 5.20 in the morning when
we return. That's it for us, though. On behalf of everybody here at Broadcasting
House, this is Andrew Crawford wishing you, wherever you are, whatever you're
doing, a very good night. Good night. We are making changes to the way BBC live
streams are distributed via third party services and platforms, and the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds.