TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-08H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 You're listening to Today on BBC Radio 4 with Michelle Hussain and Justin Webb.
It's seven o'clock on Tuesday the 28th of February. The headlines this morning,
Rishi Sunak is in Belfast as he tries to win support for his new Brexit trade
deal with Northern Ireland, with the DUP saying they still have concerns. Police
have arrested a couple who disappeared with their baby seven weeks ago but
they're still searching for the child. England's cricketers chasing victory in
chasing history in New Zealand have instead suffered agonising defeat. The BBC
News is read this morning by Caroline Nichols. The Prime Minister is in Belfast
as he tries to win support for his new deal on post-Brexit trading arrangements
for Northern Ireland. The Windsor framework removes most checks on goods moving
from Great Britain to Northern Ireland and provides Stormont with a mechanism to
object to certain EU rules. MPs are now studying the details of the agreement
ahead of an expected vote. While the Democratic Unionist Party says it still has
concerns, the deal has been largely welcomed in the UK and abroad. Our political
correspondent Helen Catt reports. It has been an encouraging start for Rishi
Sunak. He told the Commons yesterday evening that the agreement was a decisive
breakthrough. The tone of the two and a half hours of questioning which followed
was markedly calm. Some prominent Brexit backers even lavished praise on his
negotiations. The Northern Ireland Minister Steve Baker became tearful as he
told BBC Newsnight it was an amazing achievement. But some MPs are keen to
examine the fine detail of what is in the agreement. Mr Sunak is expected to
address his own backbenchers at a meeting of the 1922 committee. Outside the UK,
the new framework has been welcomed by the US President Joe Biden, who called it
an essential step in protecting the Belfast Good Friday Agreement, and by the
French President Emmanuel Macron, who said it was an important decision. The
Democratic Unionist Party is pouring over the fine print of the deal before
deciding whether to return to power sharing. Here's our Ireland correspondent
Chris Page. The DUP leader Sir Geoffrey Donaldson has made it very clear his
party will take its time before responding definitively to the Windsor
framework. He highlighted that EU law will still apply in some sectors of the
economy in Northern Ireland. A linked aspect of the agreement, which will also
be closely examined by the DUP, is what's known as the Stormont Break. It would
allow the devolved assembly to raise an objection to an EU regulation if a third
of its members registered their concern. The UK government could then veto the
rule. The DUP will be assessing Rishi Sunak's claim that the mechanism
safeguards Northern Ireland's sovereignty. Other parties have expressed initial
concerns about how the mechanism would work. Two prominent DUP MPs, Ian Paisley
and Sammy Wilson, have been publicly more negative about the deal than their
party leader. Mr Paisley said at this stage he thought the framework didn't cut
the mustard. Thousands of teachers across Scotland and in the north of England
have begun a new round of strikes about pay. A Scottish union has rejected a six
percent increase, while teachers in England and Wales have had a five percent
wage rise. The government says it needs to curb inflation by managing public
spending. Here's our education editor, Bramwen Jefferies. The strike today by
the National Education Union is likely to mean many schools in the north-west,
north and north-east of England will be partially closed. Secondary schools will
prioritise those facing exams, as well as encouraging vulnerable children to
attend. Parents will have been warned if their child needs to stay at home. The
impact of a national day of action by Scotland's largest teachers union is
likely to be more extensive. A BBC investigation has found that MI5 suspected a
Muslim preacher who was close to the Manchester Arena bomber of being a
radicaliser more than 10 years before the attack. A public inquiry into the
bombing in 2017, which killed 22 people, will report later this week on how
Salman Abedi was radicalised and whether the security service missed chances to
stop him. Daniel De Simone reports. The close relationship between the
Manchester attacker Salman Abedi and Mansour Al-Anaizi was such that the
preacher from Devon was referenced at the long-running public inquiry. Police
said it was clearly a connection of significance but were unable to establish
exactly what it was. It was said that Al-Anaizi, who is now dead, was arrested
after another friend of his tried to carry out a suicide bombing in Devon
exactly nine years before the Arena atrocity. But the BBC has now established
that MI5 had been investigating Al-Anaizi as a suspected radicaliser even before
that first attack, and he was also barred from a Plymouth mosque. There was no
mention of either of those things in the inquiry's public hearings, although
there were also secret sessions focused on intelligence. A group of five
bereaved families told the BBC they're disappointed to learn of more connections
to Abedi which don't seem to have been investigated. A couple who've been sought
by police since their car broke down on a motorway in early January have been
arrested in Brighton. A helicopter and police dogs are being used in the search
for their baby who was not with them. Vincent McAvinnie reports. 35-year-old
Constance Martin and 48-year-old Mark Gordon were reported missing on the 5th of
January after their broken down car was found on fire on the M61 near Bolton.
It's believed Miss Martin had given birth either in or near the car a day or two
earlier. Gordon, a registered sex offender, was deported to Britain from the
United States in 2010 after spending 20 years in prison for a rape he committed
aged 14. A police appeal was launched and over the following weeks there were
sightings of the couple in a number of places. The pair were found Monday
evening after a sighting by a member of the public in Brighton. The police have
launched an urgent search for their baby. Police in Barcelona say the
disappearance of the British rugby player Levi Davis is now being examined by a
criminal investigation unit. Catalan police say the case contains some
disturbing issues with no logical explanation. The 24-year-old was last seen in
Barcelona four months ago. Scientists are warning that guilt-free air travel
remains out of reach. Research into fuels that do not harm the planet indicate
there are currently no clear alternatives to traditional jet fuel. Here's our
climate reporter Georgina Ranard. The authors of the Royal Society report looked
at four options for greener fuels to replace the 12.3 million tonnes of kerosene
fuel used each year in the UK. They say analysis of biofuels, hydrogen, ammonia
and synthetic fuels show they are not yet viable replacements. Biofuels made
from crops are already used on a tiny number of flights but to scale up to fuel
all of Britain's flights would require half of the UK's agricultural land,
putting pressure on food supplies. Other green options would require airplanes
to be completely redesigned. They conclude that eventually it will be possible
for flights to go fully green but that's a long way off and more research is
needed. Environmental campaigners say that time is too short for the government
to rely on technology to fix aviation's climate problem. Instead they say
ministers should be encouraging people to fly less. Decades of effective self-
rule at Walt Disney World in Florida has ended after the state's governor took
control of its land. Ron DeSantis, who's widely tipped to run for the Republican
presidential nomination, took action against the entertainment giant after it
spoke out against his political agenda. Here's our North America correspondent,
Nourmia Iqbal. Since 1967, Walt Disney World has used the self-governing Reedy
Creek District to run its Florida theme parks. It had unique control over
development and other services within its boundaries, something usually reserved
for cities and counties. The creek is now in Ron DeSantis' control who announced
there's a new sheriff in town. This comes nearly a year after Disney spoke out
against the governor's Florida bill, which restricts certain classroom
instructions about sexual orientation and gender identity. There's been
criticism towards the governor from Democrats and some Republicans, saying
punishing businesses for political speech was setting the worst precedent in the
world. Cricket England's men have lost the second test in New Zealand in
dramatic fashion. They started the final day chasing a target of 258 to win,
which would have been a record, but they were all out for 256. England are only
the second side in history to lose a test match by one run. As he shook hands
with his victorious rivals, the England captain Ben Stokes had a smile on his
face. Being on the losing end of that game is obviously disappointing, but I
think just, yeah, being a part of it was, you know, I guess just takes any
disappointment away from losing it because, you know, that's what you play a
game, it's what you play test match cricket for, is to be in those moments and
we'd obviously love to be on the other side of it, but you know, losing games
like that is what it is, isn't it? The England captain Ben Stokes. Thank you,
nine minutes past seven is the time. There's a suggestion this morning that the
horrors of the Manchester bomb can be linked to a man whose name did not come up
in the public hearings of the inquiry. The man, Mansour Al-Anaizi, was a Muslim
preacher who is now dead. He has previously been arrested after a friend of his
tried to carry out a suicide bombing in Exeter in 2008. What the BBC is saying
this morning is that Al-Anaizi had been investigated by MI5 and was close to
Salman Abedi, the Manchester bomber. Let us talk to Nick Aldworth, who's the
former counter-terrorism national coordinator. Good morning to you. Good
morning. What do you make of this connection and of the fact that it wasn't
widely discussed at the public inquiry? So the fact that there's a connection,
or excuse me, a reported connection, it doesn't surprise me at all. During the
inquiry we heard from Witness J, who was a senior MI5 officer, that Abedi had
multiple contacts directly with subjects of interest and indirectly with others.
So I have no surprise about that. The fact that it didn't come up in open court
doesn't mean to say that it didn't come up in the closed sessions, and I'm not
sighted on what was said in those sessions. So I think that it's good to see
reporting, it's good to see that these things are probed beyond the inquiry, but
also I think that tomorrow, sorry, Thursday, when the report comes out, we will
see what we've seen to date, which is a really thorough probing and at times
critical review by Sir John Saunders. I mean it's true that a contact of a
contact isn't necessarily something that would lead to a wider investigation,
but in those circumstances where there is a contact of a contact, I mean the
question I suppose is how far the probing needs to go. Yeah, I agree, and I
think when I looked at the evidence of Witness J, I was a little surprised that
just how many contacts of contacts there had been reported, plus also direct
contacts. So Abedi's contact started in 2013 with direct contact with a subject
of interest, sorry, 2010, with direct contact with a subject of interest, and he
went on to have three contacts with subjects of interest and three indirect
contacts. So I think for me, there is something here about whether systems are
effective enough to join up the dots, and albeit they don't necessarily give a
definitive picture, should they have triggered a more inquisitive approach to
this particular individual. Is it about inquisitiveness or is it just about
resources or is it, do you think, both? Well, Witness J was adamant, having been
asked several times about whether this was resources and was clear that it
wasn't, so I can't argue with that. It does seem to me, though, that there was
a, from 2014 onwards, an acceleration of demand on everybody, policing and
security services, and while Witness J says that there were also increases in
demand for, sorry, increases in resources to match that demand, it does seem to
me that resources always play into these things. One other thing has come up at
the inquiry, isn't it, which is going to concern people. So Salman Abedi himself
was a subject of interest. Well, there was a case that was closed, wasn't it,
back in July 2014. He wasn't then referred to prevent. Wasn't then referred to
prevent. What do you make of that? Yeah, so it would appear that MI5 at that
time had a policy that the decision to refer an individual to prevent was at the
discretion of the investigating officer. They say that that's now changed. I
think what's quite interesting around that particular event is there is no
record of whether a decision was actively made not to refer. And for me, there's
always a conflict between investigators and intelligence people who want to
secure best evidence, and those of us who work in operations who want to
actually try and stop the problem, you know, directly. And it could well be that
a decision was made and that by referring to prevent, it would have been obvious
that there were sources of intelligence that they didn't want Abedi to be aware
of. But equally, it could just be that somebody didn't consider doing it. Nick
Aldworth, former national coordinator for counter-terrorism. Thank you very
much. Now, falling energy prices and a better economic outlook mean that the UK
is set to borrow tens of billions of pounds less this year than previously
thought, so says a report which Sean has been looking at. Sean? Yes, thanks,
Michelle. We had the energy regulator yesterday, didn't we, saying how much less
it's going to cost the government to subsidise the heating of households around
the country as those gas and electricity prices have fallen, fallen by about a
thousand pounds a year since the last calculations were done three months ago.
Now, we've got this analysis this morning from the Institute for Fiscal Studies,
the Independent Economic Research Institute. It's been looking at what impact
that will have then on the Chancellor's budget in a couple of weeks' time. Paul
Johnson is the director there, joins me now. Morning, Paul. Morning. What
options does this give the Chancellor then? Well, it certainly gives him a
little bit more room in the short run. So, for example, he could very easily
within these numbers extend the energy price guarantee for another three months
to cushion people over the first part of the next fiscal year. At the moment,
the guarantee is supposed to go up from £2,500 to £3,000, and that will result
in rather higher bills for a lot of households over that time. The problem he
has is that probably a lot of this benefit that he's getting is short-term,
because it's driven by lower energy bills, it's driven by somewhat lower
spending, and the economy doing a little bit better than expected over this
period. What really matters, of course, is what happens to the economy over the
next four or five years. And there, he's very much in the hands of the Office of
Budget Responsibility. If they give him some forecasts, anything like those that
the Bank of England gave him, then I'm afraid he's got no more room for the
manoeuvre into the medium run than he had back in November. But when people hear
you guys predicting that we could be borrowing £30 billion less than previously
thought this year, many will be saying, well, look, we've been arguing for
higher public sector pay, why not use it on that? Well, there's obviously a very
strong case for higher public sector pay. You can't have a situation which we've
got at the moment where public sector workers are falling further and further
behind people in the rest of the economy and indeed suffering very sharp real
terms cuts in their pay. So I think there is a strong case for public sector pay
to go up. One of the things the Chancellor will have to determine though is
whether that comes alongside some modest additional tax rises elsewhere in order
to pay for that. Would it need to? In the short run, no, but in the medium run,
possibly, given where we are with the economy and the public finances. So one
thing he could do is offer some increases in the short run and then, as it were,
hope that things get better later on. What he's done already essentially is say,
look, we're OK-ish for the next couple of years. I'm making it really difficult
for whoever the next government is by having some very tight spending plans
there. He could add to that by increasing pay in the short run and then leaving
the bill, as it were, until after the next election. Paul Johnson, thank you.
Director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies, get that date in your diary then,
March 15th, because the Chancellor is going to start analysing all of these
numbers now to put his budget together for that day. Sean, thank you. 17 minutes
past seven. A couple who disappeared with their baby have been found and
arrested in Brighton. Constant Martin and Mark Gordon are in custody, but the
baby has not been found. Our correspondent in Brighton, Vincent McAvinney, has
been speaking to Detective Superintendent Lewis Bassford. He says officers from
both Sussex and the Metropolitan Police as well have joined the search. It is a
vast area and at the present, you know, we are looking in the local vicinity to
where the couple were arrested last night, seeking a shelter or location to
where they may have been held up and hopefully where the baby is present. You
obviously have the couple now being held and being questioned. Are they offering
any guidance on where the baby is? At this time, we've got no information from
the inquiries that we've had since the arrest that are leading us to any
location where the baby is. We're certainly working on the premise that the
arrest location was close to open land and the couple moving towards that land
and that's why we are focusing heavily on where we are right now. And it's a
huge area. They were last seen in Newhaven, which is about 10 miles down the
coast. Are you searching in all open land here? How many officers are taking
part in this? So we're certainly flexing numerous officers between Sussex and
the Metropolitan Police and that number will flex as the day goes on. At
present, we are focusing on this initial area working out but we know and as
I've said many times in this investigation, when you know, the focus of looking
for that baby, that we know that they travel, we know they travel long distances
and so actually my plea to the members of the public here in Brighton and
crossing over towards Newhaven is please, you know, look, be vigilant in the
open land where you are, in the outbuildings that you may have on your own
property and assist us in that way by being vigilant and searching for the areas
that you own and occupy. And the couple had been sleeping at one point in a blue
tent as well. Should people be on the lookout for anyone camping, Ruff? Yes,
certainly. No information is too small. We know obviously that back on now on
the 8th, they arrived in Newhaven with that tent and sleeping bags. We haven't
recovered that and we haven't got that as part of the investigation to date. So
we still work on the premise that they arrived in Newhaven on the 8th. Yes, it
is some 8, 9, 10 miles away from where we are today but we know they've
travelled, walked long distances and so that actually can still be in the local
area. That baby, we don't know if it's a boy or girl, eight weeks old, it's had
no medical attention. This is really a race against time now for your officers,
isn't it? As we've always said, this is about that baby. The fact that from our
investigation, both Constance and the baby had no medical attention obviously
pre or post birth and we've seen the climate and the change in the weather
forecasts that we've had since the 5th of January and so obviously my concern as
always has been the exposure from the elements to the baby. So yes, as time goes
on, the risk certainly does increase. Police Officer Lewis Basford there on the
search for the baby. It's now 20 past 7. Aviation is supposed to get to net zero
emissions by 2050, jet zero as the idea is often called. It's part of the
overall UK net zero commitment. Within seven years, 10% of flights are supposed
to run on sustainable aviation fuel, although the head of British Airways'
parent company said recently that that can't happen without a lot more of the
fuel being produced. Which fuel though? Professor Marcel McManus from the
University of Bath has been doing quite a lot of work on those fuels for a Royal
Society report. She leads the university's Institute for Sustainability.
Morning, Professor. Good morning. What's the problem you've identified? Well, we
have looked at four main alternatives to jet fuel. We've looked at biofuels,
we've looked at hydrogen and ammonia, and we've also looked at e-fuels, which
are sometimes called power to liquid. And the issue is that none of these are
readily available at scale at the moment, and the biofuels, which are closest to
being available at scale, and we perhaps know these already from the fuels that
we mix in with our vehicles on the forecourt and with petrol and diesel, not all
of these meet the sustainability criteria set out by the Renewable Energy
Project or the government. Why not? Because they require new crops? It's because
some of the crops aren't as... the inputs that have to go into these processes
are quite energy intensive. And some of them also require a larger amount of
land than we might... So I think you're saying that biofuels, or at least some
biofuels, aren't necessarily that sustainable. Sorry? Professor, can you still
hear me? Yes. Yeah. It's not... Yeah, Professor King. Yeah, Professor King,
sorry. Sorry, Professor, you were cutting out there. Let me just ask you again,
because I know it's a broad category, sustainable fuels, but when British
Airways, for example, talks about this, they're really talking about a fuel made
from things like old cooking oil and takeaway coffee cups, something like that.
Are you saying that even that is not necessarily that sustainable? There isn't
the scale that we can use to produce enough fuel for our demand at the moment,
using those types of materials. We can look at sewage and municipal solid waste.
But again, scaling up to the levels that we require is very difficult and does
have environmental impacts as well. Why does it have environmental impacts?
Well, with some of these waste materials, obviously, there's the collection and
there's the processing involved with that. With some of them, obviously, we need
to do that processing anyway. But the waste materials are the ones that we found
have the better environmental credentials than some of the other bio-based
fuels. Okay. So where does this leave you in terms of a conclusion on the Jet
Zero idea? To carry on flying as we are, if we can't necessarily use that much
sustainable fuel as part of it, would require massive offsetting? Well, I think
we would like to see us investing in different types of fuels. So there's a
hydrogen or some of these e-fuels where we're using carbon dioxide, which can be
collected from industrial flue or longer term captured from the atmosphere. But
we don't have that technology currently available at scale. So I think
investment in those technologies will enable us to make these different fuels in
the future. Professor Marcel McManus, thank you. 24 minutes past seven to the
Sport and Rob. Thanks, Justin. Well, maybe you follow the final day of the
second test in Wellington via television, radio or the BBC Sports and Rob. Or
maybe you're just waking up to the news, but the details, they really are
astonishing. Not necessarily, of course, in the fact that England lost to New
Zealand and that therefore the series is drawn one all, but instead that they
lost by just one run on a final day of incredible drama. Only the West Indies
win in the Adelaide test in 1993 has ever had the same result. And there are
shades of England's win at Headingley in 1981, with the further fact that this
today is only the fourth test match to have been won by the team required to
follow on. Our chief cricket writer, Stefan Schemmelt, has been on the line from
Wellington's Basin Reserve. You just wonder if this grand old ground has ever
seen the like of it, Rob. The emotions that we've gone through today, the
complete roller coaster up and down from when England you felt had lost the
match in the first hour to regaining control and then to that incredible finish.
I don't think the noise inside this ground when Neil Wagner had James Anderson
caught down the leg side, the last wicket to seal New Zealand's victory, will
ever leave me. It was an incredible day, pure sporting theatre actually, that
moment when Jimmy Anderson shuffled out as the last man with seven to win and
then surprised us all by clubbing that remarkable boundary off. Wagner thought,
is he going to do it? Is this 40 year old man in his 179th test going to hit the
winning runs? It had everything. Anyone who was here and it was free entry for
spectators in Wellington today will feel very lucky that they witnessed it
regardless who they were supporting. Two moments I suppose, Stefan, that you
might describe as turning points. The first would be Ben Stokes' decision to
invoke the follow on and the second I suppose also might have been when Joe Root
ran out Harry Brook without Brook scoring, although of course Root did go on
then to try and rescue the innings. I mean, would you regard those as the key
moments? The follow on's an interesting one because I don't think there were
many people at the time thinking that Ben Stokes had made a bad decision. The
conditions were still good for bowling. England, previous to that, had three
times gone through the New Zealand top order. It was only later that the
problems revealed themselves. A weary, fast bowling attack, Ben Stokes not able
to play a full part in himself and of course, Kane Williamson putting on a
masterclass of a century. The Brook run out was calamitous for England actually.
We're talking about the form batsman in test cricket at the moment. He's made
such a prolific start to his career, but that did give Root the bit between his
teeth. He launched a stunning counterattack in that partnership with Ben Stokes.
It was for me, it was that spell from Wagner when he got rid of Root and Stokes.
That was when the match was really won by New Zealand. Yes, but whatever the
result, it seems that players from both sides are talking above all about how
this has been once again, a great advert for the test cricket format. And it's
something that Brendan McCollum was absolutely clear about when he walked into
Lord's last May. I'll remember it really, really clearly listening to him to
say, it isn't just about whether we win or whether we lose this England team,
it's about how we play and if we can breathe some much needed life into the test
format and haven't they done that. Stephen Shummel, thank you very much. Thanks
very much. We'll hear from England captain Ben Stokes and the team's head coach
Brendan McCollum in an hour from now. One other story for you, an England's
Serena Vigman and squad member Mary Earps have both been honoured at the FIFA
awards ceremony in Paris. Vigman as coach of the year, Earps as the goalkeeper
of the year. This to follow, of course, England's win in the women's European
football championships last year. Here are the tips then. Leicester 430, number
one, getting closer. Catterick 445, number five, here's one for you, Betty, just
call me Al. Thank you, Rob. With details of tonight's final on four here now is
Rachel Stonehouse. Four months ago, a 24-year-old professional rugby union
player called Levi Davis vanished without trace in Barcelona. The former X
Factor star was on the brink of a new career as a singer and voicemails he left
for a close friend in the hours leading up to his disappearance suggest he was
in good spirits. He hasn't been seen or heard from since. File on four traces
the last known movements of Levi and here's from the friends and family who are
struggling to understand what has happened to him. That's file on four, looking
for Levi. With me, Rachel Stonehouse, tonight at eight. The weather, it will be
largely cloudy today, a few isolated light showers staying bright in north-
western Scotland. You're listening to Today on Radio 4 with Michelle Hussain and
Justin Webb. Time is 29 minutes past seven and Caroline Nichols has a summary of
the news. Rishi Sunak is in Belfast trying to win support for his new deal on
post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. Many senior Conservative
MPs have backed the Windsor framework which removes most checks on goods going
from Great Britain to Northern Ireland and provides Stormont with a way to
object to certain EU rules. It's unclear if the Democratic Unionist Party will
support the agreement and re-enter a power-sharing government. Thousands of
teachers across Scotland and the north of England are striking today in their
fight for an above-inflation pay rise. Some schools will be partially closed.
There'll be more walkouts in other areas tomorrow and on Thursday. A BBC
investigation has found that MI5 suspected a Muslim preacher who was close to
the Manchester Arena bombing of being a radicaliser more than 10 years before
the attack. Mansour Al-Anaizi was also close to the man behind an attempted
suicide bombing in Exeter in 2008. A group of five bereaved families have said
they're disappointed the connections don't appear to have been investigated. A
couple who disappeared more than seven weeks ago, Constance Martin and Mark
Gordon, have been arrested in Brighton. A helicopter and police dogs are being
used in the search for their baby who was not with them. The Governor of Florida
has approved legislation which ends Disney World's self-governing status.
Rondesantes, who's expected to seek the Republican nomination to run for
president, had been criticised by the company last year for his policies. He
said there was a new sheriff in town. Scientists are warning that guilt-free air
travel remains out of reach. The authors of a report from the Royal Society say
there are no green alternatives to traditional jet fuel. The Royal Mail has
revealed the final set of new stamps to feature the image of the late Queen
Elizabeth. The commemorative stamps will mark the 100th anniversary of the
Flying Scotsman steam train. Thank you. Exactly half past seven is the time. It
was plain within minutes of the start of the news conference between Rishi Sunak
and Ursula von der Leyen that the Windsor framework is more than just a
technical solution to the problems of post-Brexit trade in Northern Ireland. It
is an attempt, at least, to set a new course for the whole of the UK and its
relationship with the EU. It has been hailed by some, endorsed by Brexiteers, by
former Remainers. Others, though, with a crucial part to play, are keeping
silent for the time being. In a moment, we're going to hear from the DUP leader,
Geoffrey Donaldson, who has to make some difficult calculations now. But let's
get a wider view first from Northern Ireland. Martha is there. Big television
screens bringing the news about the protocol here inside the Harland and Wolfe
Welders Football and Social Club, named for the famous shipbuilding firm which
used to dominate East Belfast with those giant yellow cranes, Samson and
Goliath. This is a staunchly loyalist area. So what are people here making of
the news about the protocol? Can we take your first name to use? Tommy. The
Prime Minister is saying there's been a breakthrough today. What do you think
about that? It just depends what's in it, in the deal. You know, the DUP will
have to sit down and read it and see what they think, see if it passes our seven
tests. Why are those tests important, do you think? Us here in Northern Ireland
are part of the UK and we want to remain part of the UK, so it'll see what's in
the small print of that deal. And what do you think they really need to be
looking for? Just that we're not left out. We're not going to be set apart from
the rest of the UK. Do you trust the DUP to do a good job? I would trust them
more than I would trust the Tories. Emma's a community activist in the area. And
when you heard the news about what the Prime Minister's describing as a decisive
breakthrough in the protocol, you're rolling your eyes. What do you think?
Honestly, I don't believe anything the Tory party say at this stage. They talk a
good talk. They've had eight years to deliver some shape or form of Brexit and
they have failed to do so. And I don't think Prime Minister Sounek is going to
be any different. What he's saying is that there'll be a frictionless border now
and the chance for the Stormont Assembly to have a break on any kind of new
regulation. It's only when people from Northern Ireland look at the finer print
that they can then better understand the complexities post Good Friday agreement
and the delicate balance that lies within the communities. So I do think that
sometimes they might think that they've delivered on it, but actually they
haven't really made any progress on the deal at all. So if you had the chance to
meet Rishi Sounek, what would you be saying to him? I would be saying to him
that he needs to better understand the complexities within Northern Ireland,
especially at a grassroot level. We are 25 years post Good Friday agreement, but
we still have a hugely divisive and segregated society. But if he can get the
Northern Irish protocol to work better by these negotiations with the European
Union, won't that make a difference? At a grassroot level, it depends on what
the outcome of the fine print is. For me, Northern Ireland and the UK need to be
the key holders of sovereignty. That's the same as it is for any other state.
Alistair's a businessman. He runs a company called Desk Warehouse, and he's had
a lot of problems since the start of Brexit. It's ironic that we can buy product
from Eastern Europe, Lithuania, Poland, etc. relatively simply. Yet buying
product from mainland UK has been an absolute nightmare. And in fact, a lot of
our suppliers refuse point blank to deliver to Northern Ireland. So we've lost
part of our supply chain. Now, obviously, we're just all finding out more about
the news of what was agreed today. But from what you've heard so far, what do
you think? In principle, it's good to see some agreement, because we need to get
back into stormant. There's a lot of bigger problems here in Northern Ireland
which need sorted out quickly. I'm back now in the very centre of Belfast, just
by the enormous Victorian City Hall. And people here on their way back from work
are just beginning to hear the news about a possible breakthrough on the
protocol. It's such a prosperous, thriving place, the North. And let's not make
hard work of a thing. Let's just err on the side of what's making us most
prosperous, what's conjust with the peace and resolve and just all pull the one
way together on it. And I think it would be a real shame if for the 25th
anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement that there was no storming up in place.
We're kind of in this sort of no man's land at the moment where nobody really
knows what to do. So just hopefully an answer would be good about something one
way or the other. It's really good. It's just interesting to see how both sides
of the community are going to react to it. What would you like to happen? I
don't know, just that the Assembly gets back up and running mainly, so the DP
finally give it and then stop being silly. Hopefully the DP wants to go back to
storming, I guess. Why do you want that to happen? Well, there's a lot of
budgets that can't be made at the moment now without storming being back. So
it'd be nice to see that happening. There's a lot of people who are suffering.
For some families, the lack of power sharing here has been devastating. It's
been hell, to be honest. Martine McGowan's little boy, Dahi, urgently needs a
heart transplant. They managed to get a law passed to make organ donation easier
in line with the rest of the UK. But all of that was put on hold when power
sharing collapsed. Last year we had a massive victory of getting Dahi's loved
ones to come to the UK. Last year we had a massive victory of getting Dahi's
law, the organ donation laws, changed here. Slightly over a month ago we found
out the news that the secondary legislation, which was always going to be there
and needed to be passed, couldn't be passed because there was no sitting
Assembly. And we were devastated because we had worked so hard over the last
number of years. Yeah, Dahi was fighting for his life. He had a heart operation
and we were fighting with our politicians as well in the middle of all... It was
a bit of a disgrace that it had to happen. We have had a happy ending, but
there's so many legislation out there that don't have a Dahi that can get their
very important pieces of legislation over the line. So what do you think about
the fact that there's been an agreement at any rate between Rishi Sunak and the
European Commission? If it can get politicians, MLAs, ministers in place to give
people answers, to give people a bit of hope, then I would welcome it. But I
don't think anybody should have to go through what we've had to go through as a
family. That was Martin McGowan ending that report from Martha. Listening to it
was Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, leader of the DUP. Good morning to you. Good
morning. Are you going to back this deal or not? Well, as I said yesterday in
the House of Commons, we recognise that progress has been made across a number
of areas. And about which we had concern, and you heard some of that in your
interviews by Martha in Belfast, the impact the protocol had been having on
businesses and consumers in Northern Ireland and our ability to access goods and
our supply chains in Great Britain. I think that these proposals go some way to
addressing those concerns. But there remain some issues where we will continue
to engage with the government. And we will take our time, as the Prime Minister
said. This is a very complex agreement. We need to understand it. The legal text
we only received yesterday afternoon. So we're going to take time to study the
legal text to get legal advice on it. And then we'll come to a conclusion on the
agreement as a whole. One of the big issues is this Stormont break, isn't there?
So the idea that Stormont now has the power to stop Northern Ireland diverging
significantly from the rest of the UK when there's a new piece of EU
legislation. If it is deemed necessary, then there can be an intervention from
Northern Ireland. Do you believe at the moment that the Stormont break, as it
seems to have been set out, is enough? Well, this was one of our key tests. And
I do think that what has been proposed at first reading does give Stormont the
ability to apply the break, where the application of EU law for the purposes of
facilitating cross-border trade impacts on our ability to trade with the rest of
the United Kingdom. For the purposes of trading within the UK internal market,
we believe that Northern Ireland should have unfettered access to that market.
And if EU law or changes to EU law were to impact in a way that undermined our
ability to trade within the UK, then I think it is right that Stormont has a
break. And do you think this gives you that break? And that we're able to
ultimately veto that, any new such law. Because the fine print, looking at the
details of it, it says the break will not be available for trivial reasons.
There must be something significantly different about a new rule. This is a new
rule imposed by the EU. Are you happy with that? Well, again, that's why we need
to take time to study the legal text to understand fully what all of these
things mean, how they will work in practice. But of course, we're not wanting to
do this for trivial reasons. We want to do it in circumstances where a change to
law would impact on our ability to trade with the rest of the United Kingdom.
And that certainly is no trivial matter. Your tone this morning, if I may put it
like this, seems cautiously positive. Is that fair? Well, look, you may
characterize what I'm saying in the way that you feel is appropriate. Is that
appropriate? Well, I have said that progress has been made. We continue to have
some concerns. We will examine the legal text. We'll look at all of this in the
round and come to a decision. We're reasonable people. But we want to ensure
that what the prime minister has said is matched by what is actually in the
agreement itself. Can it deliver on the areas of concern that we set out in our
seven tests? How much is your thinking going to be influenced by what you also
heard in that piece from Martha? In some cases, really desperate desire from
people in Northern Ireland to see Stormont up and running again, to see the
assembly that you haven't been going to, which is functioning and the need for
that. Is that something in your thinking now? I am a committed devolutionist. I
believe in Stormont and I believe that having our own government and legislature
in Northern Ireland is important for the people of Northern Ireland. You heard
that from the people who were interviewed in Belfast, and I think that's the
case across Northern Ireland. But we want to ensure that Stormont has strong
foundations. The protocol undermined those foundations and indeed undermined the
principles at the heart of the Belfast or Good Friday agreement. And we need to
ensure that what has been agreed by the prime minister resolves those issues,
that it strengthens the foundations of Stormont. But if you decide it does,
you're happy to go back in and to be as you would be, playing second fiddle to
Sinn Féin? Well, actually I don't accept that. The position of First Minister
and Deputy First Minister are co-equal in law. Yes, we are the second largest
party in Stormont, the largest unionist party, but we will work with others to
deliver for Northern Ireland, to ensure that the issues of concern to people are
addressed. Just a final thought about the involvement of the King in the
meetings with Ursula von der Leyen yesterday. Some people have expressed
disquiet about that. Do you? Well, look, that is a matter for His Majesty the
King, and I'm not going to second guess what the King feels is appropriate. He
was meeting Ursula von der Leyen, who is the President of the EU. I am told that
the King was not involved in the detail of any of the political side of this,
and I'm not going to get drawn into this. What is important for me is to focus
now on what has been agreed by the EU and the UK government. And does it work
for Northern Ireland? Does it restore Northern Ireland's place within the United
Kingdom? Does it resolve the issues around Article 6 of the Act of Union and our
ability to trade within the UK internal market? Those are the issues that we're
focused on right now, and we will assess the agreement. We'll look at the legal
text and we'll come to a view. Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, thank you very much. From
that, let's turn to the papers and particularly to a piece in the Belfast
Telegraph, the paper most read by the unionist community in particular in
Northern Ireland and the influential commentator Sam McBride, who has clearly
gone into these matters in some detail and on the storm and break says it is so
convoluted as to perhaps be more significant as a theoretical threat rather than
something which may ever be deployed. And on the Green Lane for goods, he said
it's not going to be like walking through the Green Lane at an airport. It will
still involve barriers to trade. Businesses wanting to avail of it will have to
register with a trusted trader scheme. Large businesses will do so. It may be
the sort of hassle which puts off others. He says, though, it does mean that it
still represents a customs border in the Irish Sea. The Financial Times is among
several papers to comment on Boris Johnson, the former prime minister, not being
in the House of Commons to hear Rishi Sunak last night. Boris Johnson's allies,
according to the FT, saying he is considering himself how to respond to the
deal. Rishi Sunak, of course, saying that MPs will have a vote at the
appropriate time. And there is also a considerable amount of discussion of the
deal in the editorial pages, really, of most of the papers, with, it is fair to
say, a general thought that it is more comprehensive than most of those writing
both in favour and somewhat against the bill and against the deal had initially
thought was likely. Best pictures of the day, I think, are the northern lights,
or as the male puts it, the southern lights, because there were all these
extraordinary sightings, well, some as far south as Somerset, as we heard on the
programme yesterday. We're going to hear what some people who saw it in Suffolk
last night thought in just a moment. But as we talked about on the programme
yesterday, and as the male says today, if you look at the pictures of the green
and pink and wonder why that's happening, apparently, according to the Met
Office, the pink particles or the reds and purples are because of oxygen atoms
being excited. No, sorry, I've got that wrong. The green colour, I've got this
completely wrong. The green colour is because of oxygen atoms being excited,
whereas the reds and purples are because of nitrogen atoms being excited. I'd
have just read it out anyway and hope no one noticed. That's the difference
between us, I think. No, our listeners are not like that, as we know. Let's turn
then to what it was like in Suffolk for some of the lucky people who saw the
northern lights there last night. My name is Spencer from Beresford and Ebbins
in Suffolk. I decided to walk up the lane around about 9pm to see if I could see
the northern lights, save myself a trip to Iceland. I wasn't expecting to see
much, but was absolutely amazed to see a wonderful glowing red over Beresford
and Ebbins and beyond, an experience that I didn't ever expect to see right on
my doorstep. My name's Tracy. I live in Suffolk. When I knew the northern lights
would be showing themselves again, I just knew I had to go out and try.
Absolutely amazing. I really didn't think that I would see them ever in Suffolk.
My name is Steve Aylward. I thought it would be a long shot to see the northern
lights this evening, but gave it a go anyway. Just amazing colours, pinks,
greens, purples. So, lifetime first for me. Absolutely amazing. I'm Tony
Lockhart. I'd seen on a BBC News app that northern lights might be visible as
far south as Cornwall, so thought I'd go for a drive into the darker areas of
our county and keep my fingers crossed. Not far from Saxmondham, I stopped on a
dark hill to see if anything was visible, and I could just about make out some
faint green and red light above the horizon. A lovely sight, but now I really
want to see them properly. There we are, the northern lights. Full scientific
explanations available from Michelle for a fee afterwards. 13 minutes to eight
is the time, time for thought for the day. The speaker here in the studio this
morning is the Reverend Dr. Steve Aylward. Joining us this morning is the
Reverend Dr. Giles Fraser, who is the vicar of St Anne's Church in Kew. Morning,
Justin. Former US President Jimmy Carter, now receiving hospice care, may be the
last evangelical Christian and political leader who didn't rub up secular
progressives the wrong way. Whatever the reason for this, he has nonetheless
also been fully upfront about the role of his faith in public life. I believe
that Christians are called to plunge into the life of the world and to inject
the moral and ethical values of our faith into the processes of governing, he
once wrote. Now, I am not an evangelical, but I am struck by the contrast
between Carter and the current debate around Kate Forbes as candidate for the
leadership of the SNP. For according to a poll published yesterday by the think
tank Theos, only half of us would be content to support an evangelical Christian
holding high office. Back in 2017, Tim Farron stepped down as leader of the
Liberal Democrats, stating that he was torn between living as a faithful
Christian and serving as a political leader. In some people's minds, it seems as
if a politician's belief in God counts a bit like being in the pay of some
foreign power, a sort of split loyalty. This was precisely the kind of thing
John F. Kennedy had to contend with in 1960 when his Catholicism was being made
an electoral issue. This year, it may be a Catholic against whom the finger of
suspicion is pointed, he said. In other years, it has been and may someday be
again a Jew or a Quaker or a Unitarian or a Baptist. Now, the other day I
tweeted out something that I've rather come to regret. I said, secularism now
means a ban on religious people in public life. That's clearly not nuanced
enough. The monarch is head of the Church of England, we have bishops in the
House of Lords, and the fact is that most of our recent prime ministers have
held at least some kind of religious faith. But still, the finger of suspicion
continues to get raised about religious people in political life, perhaps even
more so now than in JFK's day. These days, political leaders with a faith have
carefully to manage the way they express it with more than half an eye on public
perception. But the thing is, I'm not sure there is such a thing as private
religious belief. Theologically, it makes as much sense to me as private cricket
or private language. Faith is a practice and is only kept private in a society
which is hostile to it, and such places are often not democracies. Which is why
it should bother us all when people are treated with suspicion because of their
religious commitments. Of course, in a democracy, politicians should expect to
have their views carefully scrutinised. But if the political sphere can only be
for those who have no faith, or those who are obliged to keep quiet about it,
then surely all our politics is the poorer. And that was Thought for the Day
with the Rev. Dr Giles Fraser. The Vicar of St Anne's Church, Hugh, brings us to
nine minutes to eight. More bodies have been recovered of people who were on
board a wooden boat, barely seaworthy it would appear, because it broke up as it
came towards Calabria, having set off from Turkey. At least 62 people died. It's
thought there are more children among those still accounted for. Twelve are
already known to have died, and there are surviving passengers who are speaking
of children who were on board and who are still missing. Let's talk both about
the immediate relief effort and the route that this boat was on, Turkey to
Italy, a long journey bypassing Greece, where resources were put to implement
the Turkey-EU deal to stop crossings from Turkey into Greece. Sylvia Mancini is
Head of Humanitarian Affairs at Médecins Sans Frontières and is in Calabria.
Sylvia, tell us first what you and your colleagues are seeing in the aftermath
of this and in dealing with the survivors. Yes, good morning. Actually, my
colleague, they're seeing really heartbreaking stories and scenario. They are
dealing with 60 survivors at the moment. They are recovering in a sort of
shelter there. And we are giving first psychological support, which is an
initial, let's say, stabilization activities to try to make them keep with the
disaster and in a human supporting way. At the same time, give them logistical
and practical support, make the call to the family to announce them that they
are alive. Is MSF affected by the recent Italian government decree that
essentially wants to stop NGO ships acting, in their words, as ferry boats for
migrants, picking them up at sea? Certainly, everybody is affected, other NGOs
as well. And this is a way to increase, let's say, this kind of tragedy. We ask,
in fact, to provide a safer passage, a legal crossing of sea and also at length
to the European and Italian policymakers. All forms of legal avenue allowing
refugees to reach Europe should be put in place. And also, it's important that
at the same time, institutionalized approach from Europe and Italian
authorities, meaning coordinating such a system, should be put in place in the
Mediterranean Sea. An approach which should be only humanitarian, not
necessarily securitization like it is at the moment. OK. Asli Okiai also joins
us working on migration at the IAI, the Istituto Affari Internazionale. It's a
think tank in Italy. Do you know, Asli, how do these boats manage to set off
from Turkey? I know they're heading for Italy rather than Greece, but you would
imagine the Turkey-EU deal ought to prevent boats leaving the shores of Turkey
at all. Hi, good morning and thank you for having me. Well, yes, the EU-Turkey
deal, it has had an impact, let's say, although I have to say it's not so easy
always to trace, let's say, the direct impact of policies on the departures and
the routes. But at the same time, we know what we have been observing in the
last years has been that the crossing between Turkey and Greece, which is
obviously much shorter and much, quote unquote, easier, has been reduced, let's
say, to a certain extent. And this normally, what's Italy, what we call the
central Mediterranean route is around 2015, 16, it has been much more of a
journey, a route, let's say, directly between Libya later on and also Libya and
Tunisia towards Italy. But this is something that we have been observing. I
mean, people that are interested in migration, it is not a, let's say, new
development or something very surprising that in the end, the smuggling
businesses, as well as the people that want to somehow reach Europe, according
to the adaptation of smuggling businesses towards according to the policies,
this route somehow diverts and changes. We cannot say now this is going to be
like a dominant phenomenon or not that we will need to still see. But at the
same time, there has been already some change happening for the arrivals at
Italy, where the, let's say, point of embarkation has been becoming more
diverse, not only limited to Libya and Tunisia, but also ships from Turkey. And
obviously- In this country, sorry, because in this country, we're much more
focused on numbers across the channel for much more obvious reasons. Can you
just give us an idea of the numbers, perhaps every month, currently every week,
however you want to put it, who are trying to leave Turkey for Europe one way or
another? Well, the numbers of the people who are trying to leave, I cannot give
you like a concrete number because we don't know exactly how many people leave.
We more know the people that arrive, but at the same time, in terms of the
people that arrive, we don't know always or immediately the origin of the, let's
say, or the point of final embarkation, this embarkation of the ship. Are we
talking hundreds per month? It changes according to the month, according to the
season, etc. So it's like in terms of what I can give you more of a number that
like, yes, of course, in Italy, for example, as we are talking about Italy in
this case, the arrivals, the embarkations, let's say it has been last year over
100,000. And compared to, of course, like in 2020, where there was also the
COVID restrictions and much less mobility in general, this number was like
around a little bit over 30,000. Very useful. Thank you so much, Asli Okai,
giving us that sense of scale, 100,000 arrivals in Italy last year. And also
thanks to Silvia Mancini. Three minutes to wait to the weather. Chris Fawkes.
Hi, Justin. Well, we've got our area of high pressure that's been with us for a
number of days still lurking to the north of Scotland, but we've got a cold
northeasterly airflow across the UK and a lot of cloud around. The cloud
thickening for outbreaks of light rain, particularly across parts of England and
Wales through the day today. Now, across the south of England, we've started off
with bright skies, a bit of sunshine, but cold with a frost. Elsewhere, though,
for northern England, across eastern Wales and across parts of the Midlands, the
cloud has been really thick this morning, thick enough to bring fairly
widespread outbreaks of light rain. And I think as we go on through the day,
this area of thicker cloud is going to be pushing its way southwards. So I think
we'll probably see a little bit more in the way of light patchy rain moving
across Wales into southern areas of England later on this afternoon. We do have
a narrow band of rain also affecting parts of Kent, so it'd be quite wet there
for a time. So some damp weather around, temperatures around 8 degrees Celsius
with probably not a great deal of sunshine around for England and Wales. For
northern Ireland, a few patches of light rain around at the moment as well. It's
extensively cloudy here this morning, but I think as we go on through the next
few hours, we do have at least prospects of the weather turning drier and
brighter with a little bit of sunshine breaking through, especially for parts of
Antrim and Down. Temperatures also around 8 degrees. Eastern Scotland seeing
thick cloud again, some spots of light rain here, but in the western side of
Scotland, the cloud should break today to give some sunny intervals.
Temperatures around 8 degrees Celsius. Similar weather tomorrow, still a lot of
cloud around, a few bright spells, but also a few patches of light rain. That's
the latest. Thank you very much, Chris. and more. Open BBC Sounds, click the
music tab and scroll to find Kate Bush's Artist Icons collection. In the next
hour on this programme, the British fashion designer Sir Paul Smith is going to
join us in the studio to talk about the new Picasso exhibition, Paris, curated
50 years after his death.