TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-08H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 ship endurance. It's you're listening to today with Michelle Hussain and Justin
Webb. It's seven o'clock on Monday the 6th of March. The headlines this morning,
migrants who cross the channel in small boats will be permanently barred from
returning to the UK under government plans. The latest leaked WhatsApps from the
Telegraph suggest that Matt Hancock was worried about relaxing Covid isolation
rules when he was health secretary in case it implied that he'd previously got
it wrong. And insiders at Twitter have told the BBC that the social media firm
can no longer protect its users from abuse and exploitation. The BBC News read
this morning by Alan Smith. The government's planning a major crackdown on
migrants who cross the English Channel in small boats by banning them for life
from returning to the UK. The measure will be part of new laws introduced to
Parliament tomorrow. Refugees groups have warned the scheme is unworkable and
will leave thousands of people in limbo. Here's our political correspondent
Helen Catt. The Home Secretary Suella Braverman has previously said that anyone
who comes to the UK illegally will be detained and removed under the provisions
of the new bill, which will also prevent them from claiming asylum in the UK,
with only some narrow exemptions expected. The government will announce tomorrow
that people removed from the UK will also face a lifetime ban on returning and
will be barred from ever applying for British citizenship. Labour has accused
ministers of rehashing promises made around last year's Nationality and Borders
Act. The Refugee Council claims the legislation will lead to tens of thousands
of refugees who would have been granted asylum in the UK being locked up in
detention and treated as criminals. The Northern Ireland Secretary Chris Heaton-
Harris said that the bill was one part of a broader plan to tackle small boat
crossings and suggested more safe and legal routes may be created. Rishi Sunak,
who has made a personal pledge to stop the boats, will meet the French President
Emmanuel Macron on Friday when it's expected they will discuss the issue. The
BBC has learned that the cost per seat of removing illegal immigrants from the
UK on Home Office charter flights last year was more than for a typical first-
class return to New York. The government spent £12.7 million on the flights,
removing 1,500 people, our Home and Legal correspondent Dominic Cacciani
reports. The figures disclosed following a Freedom of Information request showed
that in 2022 there were 62 flights privately chartered by the Home Office to
transport people out of the UK after they had exhausted any right to remain.
Each flight cost an average of more than £200,000 or £8,000 per passenger. A
quarter of the flights took off with 20 or fewer passengers aboard, including
two flights with fewer than 10. The most common destination was Albania, to
where 874 people were returned. The Home Office says many attempts to return
people are blocked by last-minute legal claims. WhatsApp messages leaked to The
Telegraph suggest the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock expressed concern
during the pandemic that relaxing rules on self-isolation would imply the
government had been getting it wrong. The paper prints what it says is an
exchange from late 2020 with England's Chief Medical Officer Professor Sir Chris
Whitty about reducing the quarantine time for contacts of Covid cases. Mr
Hancock says the leaked messages give a partial biased account to suit an anti-
lockdown agenda. Here's our correspondent Louisa Pilbeam. In November 2020,
people who had been in close contact with a confirmed Covid case were being
asked to isolate for a fortnight. According to The Telegraph, the former Health
Secretary was sent a WhatsApp by Professor Sir Chris Whitty, saying it would be
pretty well as good for people to test for five days instead. During a further
exchange of messages, Mr Hancock asked whether the 14-day quarantine period has
always been too long, later adding, I think moving to seven-day daily testing
for contacts would be huge for adherence, but going below that would seriously
worry people and imply we've been getting it wrong. The isolation period for
close contacts was reduced to 10 days the following month and scrapped entirely
for those who were double vaccinated in August of the following year, after
major disruption to businesses. Mr Hancock said there was no public interest in
releasing the messages, saying all the information had been made available to
the Covid-19 inquiry. One month on from the devastating earthquakes in Turkey
and Syria, huge numbers of people in the region still don't have proper shelter
and some residents in rural areas say they aren't getting enough aid. More than
50,000 people were killed in the disaster, which flattened entire cities. Our
Middle East correspondent Anna Foster sent this report from southern Turkey.
Four weeks after the earthquakes, this region is facing a homelessness crisis on
an unprecedented scale. The United Nations Development Programme, the UNDP,
estimates that in Turkey alone at least one and a half million people are still
inside the disaster zone with nowhere to live. Two million more have left
altogether for other parts of the country. Turkey's President Erdogan has
promised that reconstruction will start soon in the devastated areas, but it
won't happen quickly. A public parole hearing begins this morning for one of
Britain's most notorious prisoners, Charles Bronson, who spent much of the past
50 years behind bars. Bronson, now known as Charles Salvador, has carried out
nine sieges and been convicted of armed robbery and wounding, but insists he no
longer poses a threat and should be released from jail. He's only the second
inmate in UK legal history to have his case heard in public. Elected mayors in
the north of England have issued a new warning on the poor state of rail
services in the region, saying that customers face losing more than 20,000
services this year if cancellations continue at their current rate. Civic
leaders are meeting in Newcastle to discuss continuing problems at operators
such as Trans Pennine Express, which has failed to run a quarter of its
scheduled trains in recent months. The Labour Mayor of West Yorkshire, Tracey
Brabin, told us the firm should be stripped of its contract. We can't just
continue suffering like this for the next eight years. As the Mayor of West
Yorkshire, I want West Yorkshire to flourish. I want connectivity between
Manchester and Leeds and a new stop in Bradford. I want to be ambitious for our
region and not be stuck in the doldrums. Trans Pennine's management say they
have a plan to improve. Police looking for five people who were reported missing
after a night out in Cardiff have found three of them dead following a suspected
car crash. The group had travelled to the city from Porthcawl. Three women in
the party were seen early on Saturday morning. Their vehicle was found nearly 48
hours later in the St Melon's area of Cardiff. Two people are in hospital with
serious injuries. Current and former staff at Twitter have told BBC's Panorama
that the company can no longer protect users from online abuse, state-
coordinated disinformation and child sexual exploitation. They blame mass
sackings and changes made under the billionaire Elon Musk, who bought the firm
last year. Our disinformation and social media correspondent Marianna Spring has
more details. Insiders have told me that features intended to protect Twitter
users from trolling and harassment are proving difficult to maintain. Lisa
Jennings-Young, a former senior designer, says her entire team, which had worked
to keep users safe, has been sacked. An engineer working for Twitter who wanted
to remain anonymous said nobody was taking care of this type of work now. Data
analysed by anti-extremism think tank ISD backs up claims there's been a spike
in new accounts following misogynistic and abusive profiles. Twitter and Elon
Musk have not responded to Panorama's investigation. The social media site says
defending and respecting the user's voice remains one of its core values. You
can see Panorama, Elon Musk's Twitter storm at eight o'clock this evening on BBC
One. A year ago, one of the most famous ships of all time, Sir Ernest
Shackleton's Endurance, was discovered, perfectly preserved, at the bottom of
the sea in Antarctica. Now experts have been examining the vessel's insurance
policy and, as our science correspondent Jonathan Amos explains, it could hold
the key to future conservation plans. The story of how Sir Ernest Shackleton and
his men escaped Antarctica after their ship was crushed by sea ice in 1915 is
astonishing. Almost as remarkable is that anyone should find the wreck, given
it's almost two miles deep. It had been regarded as perhaps the single most
difficult wreck to find on the globe until a submersible spotted it on sonar.
Recently, the Endurance 22 expedition leader, the polar geographer John Shears,
has been searching the archives of Lloyd's of London for the lost book that
records the sinking. The record is actually in the 1916 volume, a delay that
reflects how long it took for news to reach London. The way the insurance policy
was paid out means Shackleton's granddaughter Alexandra is the wreck's owner and
with a conservation plan now under discussion, she says she doesn't want, as she
puts it, anyone rummaging through Endurance. That was our science correspondent
Jonathan Amos. John Shears will be talking to us about that about 20 to 8. Alan,
thank you. Nine minutes past seven now. A lifetime ban on applying for asylum in
the UK if you come here on a small boat will be part of new legislation on
channel crossings. That's what's being reported today ahead of the plans being
formally announced tomorrow. Lucy Morton is from the Immigration Services Union,
which represents Border Force staff, and she's in our radio car. Welcome again
to the programme, Lucy. Good morning. Do your members think that this plan, what
we hear of it so far, would stop the boats? Not as things stand at the moment.
In fact, it's actually going to be the converse when these things are published
and announced in this way. What it actually does is fuel the service, if you
like, that the criminals provide, because they'll go around, well, quick, cross
now before anything changes. But the plans, as they've been announced, really
are quite confusing. We can't remove anyone to Rwanda right now. It's subject to
legal challenge. We can't remove anyone back into Europe because there are no
returns agreements. And we lost access to the database that allows us to prove
that individuals have claimed asylum in Europe, Eurodac, when we left with
Brexit. So unless we have a safe third country that isn't Rwanda to send people
to, this just doesn't seem to be possible. Although in and of itself, the Rwanda
policy was ruled lawful at the end of last year. It was, but each individual
will be subject to challenge. So at the moment, if you cross, and this all
focuses on small boats, not lorries. So the presumption is even if this stops
small boats, which isn't massively likely, but even if it does, that traffic
will simply jump back onto lorries, which is what was being used before. But
each individual will have the ability to challenge as to whether or not that
country is in fact safe or whether or not Rwanda is in fact safe. And those
challenges, as we've seen, can drag on for months, if not years. Okay, well, we
don't know as yet what the government's answer is to those, the conventions that
govern this sort of thing and where legal challenges might go in the future. But
let me just pick up on what you said about lorries. It's very difficult, isn't
it, to come on a lorry now because of all that fencing around the channel
tunnel? Are you saying that people will find a way around that? It's harder.
Statistically, you have to try more frequently to get across on a lorry. It's
just over one effort to get across on a boat. And I think the last time I saw
the statistics, it was averaging about eight efforts to do it on a lorry. But
we've reinforced Calais-Cacau-Fraithen, but not La Havre, not Boulogne, not
Saint-Malo. There's a lot of coast there. There's some reinforcement at Zibaroga
because that's a fairly large freight port. But there's an awful lot of ports
along the French coast that we would have, I presume, to pay to fortify. Okay.
But in the fullness of time, the idea of a lifetime ban, the basic difference
between this legislation as it stands at present, at least as we what we know of
it so far, and last year's Rwanda policy and the bill is that everyone who
arrived this way would never be able to settle in this country. Once news got
out of that, do you think it would stop the boats? It would stop this route?
It's a very nebulous future that you're trading for this. You're saying to
someone who is leaving their country for whatever reason, whether that is just
to find a better life, to work here for a while, to send money home, or because
they are in need of international protection, and to say to them, well,
actually, at some point in 10, 20, 30, 40 years, you might want a British
passport. It may deter a few, but that sort of long-term planning is not a
classic part of the individuals who make this crossing. And in saying that, I
don't detract from the fact that these are individuals, and every individual has
their own motivation. Okay. And finally, do your members worry that they'd have
to get involved in the detention of people in the UK? We are involved in the
detention of people in the UK to a certain extent. Much of immigration detention
is outsourced to Mighty, who provide care and custody for us. But obviously,
places like Manston are staffed by our members, and so they are involved in this
detention. Right, but it would potentially be bigger than that if the numbers
continue. Potentially, yes. Lucy Morton from the Immigration Services Union.
Thank you. 30 minutes past seven, and listening to that was the Shadow Health
Secretary, Wes Streeting, who's pressing the government today to expand the
number of nurses and midwives in training. And we will get to that, and perhaps
to Sue Gray as well, Wes Streeting. But good morning to you. Can we start with
what we've just been talking about? Yeah. If the government does go ahead with
this legislation, would you overturn it if you came to power? Well, I doubt it
will see the light of day in practice. I think what the government's doing is a
cynical rehash of previous failed immigration policies in the hope that by
generating headlines with unworkable policies, the public might be duped into
thinking they're finally doing something about small boats. And as we are
hearing, and not just from the voices you would expect to be critical of
conservative immigration policy, but even from conservatives themselves, Priti
Patel's team describing this bill as nothing new and window dressing, for
example. Well, although actually she says that's not true. She said that quote
in the mail on Sunday isn't right. Oh, sorry. Well, sources close to Priti
Patel. I'm glad she's dealt with that one on Short Shorts. Well, no, I mean,
just to deal with it. Maybe she should give her text messages to Isabel
Oakeshott and we can all be the judge. Well, yeah, what she said, her people
have told us that. Fair enough, if that's what Priti's saying. But the point is
this, Justin, which is that if you're serious about tackling small boats, and
they really should be because it's a completely unacceptable, dangerous way for
people to arrive in Britain, you've got to do three things fundamentally. You've
got to speed up the processing of claims, fewer than 1% of small boat claims in
the last year have been processed. That's completely outrageous. You've got to
send people back promptly when their claims are failed. Those numbers are down
on 80% compared to when Labour last left office. And thirdly, you've got to get
to the root cause of this, which is the exploitative criminal gangs, where we
think hundreds of millions of pounds being wasted on the Rwanda scheme would be
better spent in the National Crime Agency dealing with that problem at source.
Because we know there are lots of people in this country who are involved in
that activity. There's no excuse for sweeping them off the streets and putting
them behind bars. What about everyone thinking of coming via that route,
beginning to understand that if they did so, and they were caught, they would
never be able to become citizens of the UK under any circumstances? Is that a
good idea or a bad one? Well, I just say two things in response to that specific
point. One is that we've got to have safe legal routes working. And if you look
at the Afghan resettlement scheme, for example, which is meant to be one of
those routes, only 22 arrivals under pathway to last year were came through that
route compared to more than 8000 who arrived in small boats. And the second
thing I'd say is, how on earth is that going to be enforced? Are we going to
tattoo people's foreheads with not welcome in Britain? You know, the idea is
wrong, and it shouldn't happen. And it's unworkable. The people who come to
this... But is it, it is just made absolutely clear, you do not believe... It's
just not going to work. But whether or not it would, you don't believe it should
be tried? Well, Justin, put it this way. We know for a fact, because it is a
fact, that among those people who've arrived, those Afghans who arrived in small
boats, are people who have fought for this country. Are we saying that we would
ban that, you know, having failed them once? Yeah, no, I got it. You're against
it? No, of course we're against it, because it's unworkable. And it's not right
or fair to turn away people who fought for this country and say, I'm sorry, but
under a blanket ban, because the Conservatives couldn't manage our borders,
we're going to have this blanket ban. I just want to hear as well what you're
saying about NHS training today, because it is a focus, isn't it, on domestic
training rather than relying on immigration. Is that right? It is. And we can
see the consequences of staff shortage, particularly in midwifery, which has got
some of the chronic shortages, 60 maternity units closed to mothers last year,
that's about one in three because of staff shortages. The government's got to
act on retention, keeping the midwives that we're losing. But we've also got to
embark on the biggest expansion of NHS staff in history, in order to get the
service up to full strength. We've put forward a plan for that expansion, fully
costed, fully funded by abolishing the non-DOM tax status, a plan so good that
Jeremy Hunt himself, when he was chair of the Health Select Committee, said that
the government should adopt it on the basis that smart governments nick the best
ideas of their opponents. And I know the Conservatives are famously not very
smart at the moment, but I'm sure, Jeremy Hunt, if you're listening, the
budget's coming up, pop it in your budget. Labour will cheer you if you adopt
our policy of doubling the number of medical school places and increasing
nursing and midwifery clinical training places by 10,000. And on Sue Gray, who
is leaving the civil service to become Keir Starmer's Chief of Staff, one of the
questions seems to be when it was that she and he met or discussed this and she
agreed to do it. Was it before or after she had finished the report into Boris
Johnson and parties? I don't know is the honest answer. Should we know? Well,
Sue Gray, I believe, has to disclose the timeline when she applies through the
appropriate process, which is the ACOBA process, which I understand she's doing
today. So I just say the process is ongoing. It probably wouldn't be appropriate
to comment much further, given it is a live process. But would you agree with
those who say it wouldn't be appropriate for her to have been discussing these
things while she was undertaking that report? That seems reasonable, doesn't it?
Well, I don't know what the timeline was. And I think based on everything that I
and I don't know Sue Gray met her once. I think the consistent view across the
political spectrum from former Conservative Cabinet Ministers to former Labour
Cabinet Ministers, and indeed current Cabinet Ministers, is that she is someone
of impeccable integrity. I'm sure she wouldn't have behaved improperly. Indeed,
that's why Boris Johnson himself was so keen to laud her until he saw a cynical
opportunity to get out of jail free car. And I don't think that's going to work.
And I'm only surprised that Conservative MPs continue to defend Boris Johnson,
which just demonstrates why poor old Rishi Sunak has got an ungovernable rabble
to try and manage. We can see why they're in disarray. Thank you very much. 20
past seven now more of the UK's biggest companies are calling for the UK to act
to attract more investment in energy. Shaun has the details. Yes, Michelle, just
across the papers this morning, the boss of Shell has told The Times the US is a
more attractive place than the UK. And the Telegraph, wind farm bosses, writing
to the Chancellor calling for a reduction in windfall taxes on electricity
generators. Scottish Power boss in the Financial Times saying we may be
squandering a gift to kickstart the economy by not reforming energy
infrastructure planning rules. I've got Miles Roberts with me, who's the chief
executive of the packaging giant DS Smith, heavy user of energy itself, one of
our biggest companies listed on the FTSE 100. Morning, Miles. Good morning.
What's your situation then? A company's are you being encouraged to invest in
your energy infrastructure? Look at DS Smith, we make a fully recycled packaging
is all fibre based. It's across the UK, across the EU and into North America.
And as part of this, you know, as a company, we're absolutely committed to net
zero by 2050. But also some interim targets. And we're building all of our
investment plans about how are we going to achieve that. But when we look in the
UK, we're really saying to the government, help us understand what are your
short, medium and long term plans for energy, carbon zero, and then we can
invest behind. So for example, what type of energy are you going to be
producing? Where is it going to be produced? How is it going to be distributed?
What's going to be the cost of that? Because without it, it makes our job of
investing really that much more difficult, particularly when we compare it to
other countries. How does it compare? Well, if we look at in some of the
engagement that we've had in countries in the EU, like in Germany and France and
Portugal, there, we've been able to get a lot more clarity. And that has
resulted in some major commitments from us in new energy solutions. So things
around biomass, waste to energy plants, etc. Are you saying Miles that you are
not able to commit to certain projects in the UK because of the energy strategy?
We're saying that we want to commit, but we're finding it very difficult when we
don't know what the UK's longer term energy solutions are going to be. We can't
build our own nuclear power station. We can't do that. The government can. If we
understand what the government's going to be investing behind, then we can
support that with our own investments. But without it, it makes it a lot more
challenging. Miles, thank you. Miles Roberts there, the chief executive of the
packaging giant DS Smith. We had a bit of an update at seven o'clock this
morning. One disco, that technology company I was talking about an hour ago,
Specialist Cloud Computing, it has a base in the UK and the US, and it says it
has looking at exploring a listing on the US stock markets. It stresses it plans
to maintain its current listing here as well, but it's looking at the United
States. Sean, thank you. 23 minutes past seven a month after the devastating
earthquake that killed more than 50,000 people, Turkey is facing a homelessness
crisis of an unprecedented scale. The United Nations Development Programme says
that at least one and a half million people are still inside the disaster zone
and have nowhere to live. The true figure could be even higher. Our Middle East
correspondent Anna Foster has travelled to southern Turkey to see how survivors
are trying to find shelter. Not everyone is leaving Iskenderun station. The
trains do still pull out regularly, and now they're free, carrying people away
from this devastated region. The Turkish disaster agency AFAD says almost two
million have now left. But two long rows of carriages here don't move at all.
We've turned this place into a home. Me, my wife, my daughter and her husband,
and my two grandchildren. The quarters are clean. Outside they provide tea, soup
and fruit juice and cake to the children. Yilmaz Cucuk and his family live on
board this train now. At night they sleep curled up on the seats. The luggage
racks are filled with the few possessions they managed to retrieve from their
damaged home. They wanted to put us in tents, but I refused. Tents are cold, and
this place has a notoriously strong wind. Yarıkkaya they call it. When it blows,
all the tents will end up in the sea. Many families are living in tents, but
there aren't enough to go around. Some have moved into sprawling new encampments
guarded by the Turkish military. The better ones have portable toilets and
playgrounds for the children. Restless now there's no school. But some people
are determined to stay as close to home as they can, even living right next to
the rubble, like the Yücesoys. You can really see where the family have tried
their best to make a home here because in the shadow of this building, which is
leaning to one side with cracks in the walls, steps away there's a tent and
they've put coloured solar lights because at night that is the only light they
have now here. There's no power. They've moved some of their plants, even a
small side table and a picture. It's a holiday souvenir from Kusadasi with
shells and the blue sea. There's a little gold dish, some paper flowers. They're
doing everything they can to build a new home outdoors. Muziyan Jelep is 74 and
she's living in the tent next door with her husband. Their cows are close by.
The couple are keeping watch on their house from across the road. My valuable
articles are in there and thieves are roaming around. Bang, bang, bang,
gunshots. The police are barely keeping them away. So many thieves, how can I
live here? I have my precious items up there. More than 160,000 buildings were
destroyed or left badly damaged in the quake. Work has started to demolish the
dangerous ones, but there isn't enough mechanical equipment in the country to do
a job like this quickly. That noise you can hear is the arm of a truck. That
noise you can hear is the arm of a crane pounding the last supporting structure
of a building, which is still standing for now. It's leaning to one side and
they're trying to bring it down fully. Back in Samandar, night is falling and
it's time for dinner. Chicken and potatoes cooked on a camping stove and eaten
from paper plates. Nobody knows how long they'll be living like this for, but
they do know that crucial presidential and parliamentary elections should be
happening in just over two months' time. And basic shelter for earthquake
survivors has now become one of Turkey's biggest political issues. Anna Foster
reporting there. 27 minutes past seven now. Jonathan's here with the sport. Good
morning. Wembley winners last week, football embarrassment last night. A record
victory for Liverpool against Manchester United. 7-0. 7-0. It needs to be
written out. S-E-V-E-N. You couldn't script it and John Murray certainly didn't.
Liverpool scratching for four, Man United apparently invincible, tipped a
surefire winner's anfield. Wrong, hugely wrong, because Liverpool were rampant
and United overwhelmed in a record-equalling heaviest defeat. So how did it
happen? Mark Lawrence won plenty of matches and trophies for Liverpool and his
time is on the line now. Morning, Mark. Morning, Jonathan. You were at
Anfielder. How did Liverpool do it? I'm really not sure, honestly. I think it
took complete capitulation from Manchester United, most definitely. I mean, the
game started off and we're all thinking, look, get a draw for Liverpool because
their form of late hasn't been too great, as everybody knows. Manchester United
have been playing extremely well. Once Liverpool's first goal went in, you had a
sense with Manchester United thinking, oh, this wasn't in the script. And of
course, as the game went on in the second half, we were never in our seats. We
were just up and down seven times altogether, obviously. And the behaviour of
Manchester United's captain was awful. He wanted to come off, Fernandes. So he
was the captain of a sinking ship, most definitely. But Liverpool, everything
they did on the day obviously went in. And I think from their point of view,
they can only get three points, even with the seven goals. But they've started
now to look a much better team because they've started not conceding goals,
which is most important. And it looks for Liverpool as though top four is a
possibility now, where three or four weeks ago it didn't look like it could
possibly happen. They're fifth, three points behind Tottenham in fourth, the
game in hand. But what about United? How damaging for their season? Well, I
think they will treat it as a write-off because they were so poor. But they will
go again. They've got too many good players not to be able to remain up there at
the top. And I just think with them, the manager obviously was upset. As I say,
complete capitulation. But the problem is really, Jonathan, for Liverpool's
point of view, they only got three points for a 7-0 win. But Manchester United
will be fine. They've got too many good players. But I think the right act will
probably be read in about three or four hours at the training ground at
Manchester United today. Thank you very much. Totally unprofessional, is exactly
what Eric Ten Haag said about his team. In contrast to Liverpool, their
Merseyside rivals Everton drew two all at Nottingham Forest. In the Women's
Super League, at least Manchester United beat Leicester 5-1, thanks to a hat-
trick from the England striker Alessia Russo. And Arsenal won the Women's League
Cup final, beating Chelsea 3-1. Let's get some live cricket now, shall we?
18-year-old Rehan Ahmed is making his ODI debut for England in their third and
final match against Bangladesh. Kevin Howells has the latest. Oh, just looking
at a review which could have given him his maiden ODI wicket as well. But it
just looks as if it's missing that stump there. Very close. 18 years, 205 days
old Rehan Ahmed. He's just missed out on that. But he's looking very confident.
Bowling OK. 11 runs from his first 2.1 overs. Bangladesh have recovered. They
were 17 for 3. They're now 89 for 2 in the 21st over. Thank you, Kevin. Former
No. 1 world champion Max Verstappen won the opening Grand Prix of the new season
in Bahrain. 41-year-old Fernando Alonso in third on his first try for Aston
Martin. So do our two selections after a winner on Saturday. Weatherby, 350, No.
7, Jetlegs, and Southall, 410, No. 5, Charging Point. Jonathan, I'd like you to
look ahead to this evening now, when Radio 4 puts AI to the test. Chat GPT is
the artificial intelligence technology that seems to be everywhere. It's an
extraordinary phenomena. It's burst on the scene. I'm Laura Lewington, and I'm
going to see what Chat GPT can do. This is going to happen. We need to learn how
to use this technology effectively. Can it write good essays, suggest holidays,
or simply change our daily lives? All of the ethical questions that concern us
when we think about using AI, they're right at the centre in the use of GPT. And
can it even make a radio programme? Find out in a documentary by Chat GPT, this
evening at 8 o'clock on Radio 4 and BBC Sound. The weather today, there'll be
showery rain continuing to sink over central areas, but basically the message is
wrap up because it's going to feel very wintry. It is 28 minutes to 8. You're
listening to Today on Radio 4, Michelle Hussain in Justing Web and Alan Smith
with the news. Migrants will be removed from the UK, banned from future re-entry
and unable to apply for British citizenship if they reach the country in small
boats under new legislation. Details are expected to be announced by the
government tomorrow. The Refugee Council says thousands of people will be left
permanently in limbo as a result, while Labour called the proposal a gimmick.
The BBC has learned that the government spent £12.7 million on flights removing
illegal immigrants from the UK last year, involving 1,500 people. The Home
Office insists the cost is justified and says many attempts to return people are
blocked by last-minute legal claims. A public parole hearing begins this morning
to decide whether the notorious prisoner Charles Bronson should be released from
custody after spending much of the last 50 years behind bars. The 70-year-old
admits using extreme violence in the past but says he's reformed his behaviour.
Elected mayors in the north of England are meeting in Newcastle today to discuss
the continuing problems facing the region's railways. They say passengers face
losing more than 20,000 services this year if cancellations continue at their
current rate. Police in Wales, searching for five people missing since the early
hours of Saturday, say they found three of them dead in a suspected car crash.
The vehicle they were in was discovered shortly after midnight. Two of the group
have been taken to hospital with serious injuries. The BBC's Panorama programme
has heard from current and former employees at Twitter who claim the company can
no longer protect its users from online abuse. They blame the number of sackings
and staff departures that followed the firm's purchase by the billionaire Elon
Musk. Twitter says defending and respecting users' expressed opinions is a core
value. You can see Panorama, Elon Musk's Twitter storm at 8 o'clock tonight on
BBC1. And the Duke and Duchess of Sussex are said to be mulling over an
invitation to the King's coronation in May. A statement on behalf of the couple
confirmed they'd been emailed about the event but it's not yet clear if they'll
accept. Thank you. It is just coming up to 25 to 8. Ever since Harold Wilson
talked about a new Britain that would need to be forged in the white heat of a
scientific revolution, Prime Ministers have talked up science and their
commitment to it. How much of a difference will Rishi Sunak's commitment to
science actually mean? There's no doubting his personal interest. He's written
about it in the Times today. But some scientists are concerned about specific
steps that are or are not being taken. Professor Sir Adrian Smith, the President
of the Royal Society, told us an hour ago about the importance of the UK being a
member of the EU's £80bn science funding programme, Horizon. Across the board,
everybody sees this as really the key to the future and it rings a bit hollow to
talk about us becoming a superpower or a leading science nation unless and until
we reassert our association. Let's talk to George Freeman, the Minister of State
for Science, Research and Innovation, who's on the line. Morning to you.
Morning, Justin. Are we rejoining Horizon? Well, the door is now open following
the success of the Prime Minister's rapprochement negotiation on the Windsor
Framework. And there's now a whole raft of talks going on. So I can't prejudge
those, but it's now a possibility in a way that it wasn't before, which is great
news. And Adrian is right that international collaboration is completely key to
both UK deep science, blue sky science research, but also to our ability to have
impact on the big global challenges we face. And what he said was he talked to
Michelle Donnelly, to your boss, the science secretary, and she's in favour. And
it sounds that you're in favour, but Rishi Sunak dodged the subject in the
Commons when he was asked about it and doesn't write about it at all in his
Times article today. So what's going on? Well, today what's going on is we're
announcing a major package of funding. Yes, but on Horizon. Yes, I'll come to
that. But where does he just say? What's going on? I mean, what's going on today
is we're announcing a major package of domestic funding. It's £370 million for
transformational technologies fund, new labs, new PhDs, the science seed funding
and quantum computing. What's going on on Horizon is that we agreed and
negotiated to join just over two years ago as part of the Brexit deal. And we've
been held up, blocked out because of the Northern Ireland protocol and pass. Now
that that's cleared, we now have the ability, as the prime minister did say last
week, to sit down and sort a whole raft of issues out with the EU, including
this. And, you know, in his five priorities this year, halving inflation,
reducing debt, raising growth, getting us out of recession, tackling small boats
and reducing NHS waiting lists, the growth piece, which is what we're working on
today, and the small boat piece are both linked to a whole raft of negotiations
with Europe. So he has a summit in Paris in 10 days with two weeks with
President Macron. And I'm absolutely, I know that Horizon and all of these
issues will be on that agenda. So why doesn't he just say, yeah, we want to
rejoin? Well, I think today the focus is on our domestic UK growth package. It's
obvious from talking to Sir Adrian Smith earlier on the programme, but I mean,
they approve of that and they're interested in that. But what they want to hear,
fundamentally, what they want to hear is we are going to rejoin Horizon or we
want to. And they understand there might be some technical negotiations about
the money, etc. But do we want to? And just clearly, is this government aiming
or not aiming at the moment to rejoin Horizon? The policy has always been that
we're seeking to associate. My Secretary of State, Michelle Doneland, said that.
I've said that. Right. So that's clear. So we are aiming to join. There might be
some technical difficulties about money, etc. But we are aiming to join Horizon.
Yeah, I think there will be some technical difficulties about money because over
the last two years, we've funded, I launched 18 months ago, our Horizon
guarantee. So we funded quite a lot of money to guarantee projects that we're
already in. We've also put in a whole series of Horizon relief packages for half
a billion before Christmas. So there is, there will be some quite difficult
negotiations about. So that's well, I mean, that's that's interesting. And
scientists listening to this will be interested in that. So basically what we
are saying, we can't make the full commitment at the moment because there are
some things we need to hear about the money before we do it. Exactly. If you've
been out of the club, not by your own volition for two years, the monies that
you would have paid in for full membership over the whole seven years clearly
aren't due. And so we need to sit down and come up with a sensible package. But
be in no doubt, the the Horizon Fellowship Programme, the ERC, the Marisca,
those fellowships are hugely valuable to UK science and research, anchoring some
of our top people. And we're very keen to make sure we can deepen our
collaborations. That's clear enough. If we can turn to small boats and the
government's policies on that and announcements this week, just just one on what
happens to people who continue to come across the channel. What would the plan
be? Would they, where would they be held? It might be tens of thousands of them.
What would happen to them? Well, you have to wait, I'm afraid, for the Home
Secretary to come out with her package. Let's just be clear on the problem. Two
years ago, it was 400 illegal migrants crossing the channel. Last year, it was
40 odd thousand. We absolutely have got to get on top of it as the as the Home
Secretary and the prime minister made clear. But what people have been telling
us this morning is that these plans are not really plans at all because they're
so totally impractical. Or there is no detail about how they could possibly be
practicable as to be meaningless. Well, it's a bit premature to comment because
they haven't been published yet. Secondly, they're briefed to the papers quite
comprehensively. And one of the things on leaks, but let me just say it's a
brief. And one of the things that the government seems to be suggesting is that
people are banned from coming to not only banned from from seeking asylum here
through that route, but also banned for life from ever becoming British
citizenship. So it's reasonable to ask, isn't it? How you can possibly think
that could work? Well, I can't comment on a package that hasn't been made
public. But what I can say is this. The Home Secretary has made very clear that
the principle underpinning this is crystal clear. If you come here illegally,
exploiting illegal systems to escape into the UK, it won't be possible. And
that's what's happening at the moment. Forty five thousand people have come from
many from Albania, a safe country through Europe and France, safe countries to
cross the channel and then disappear out into the UK. And we got to get on top
of it. So the principle is if you come here illegally to exploit our system, you
will be deported. Now, how that's done will be a matter for the Home Secretary
and we'll all wait for her proposals. But I would just say this. People said it
was impossible to resolve the dilemma in Northern Ireland. The prime minister
shown what is possible with very, very careful, assiduous, diligent attention to
detail, careful negotiation, working with the French. We've already put in place
a new task force, seven, seven hundred new staff, a fleet of new boats. And the
prime minister and President Macron are working very closely. We'll only get on
top of this through working very closely with France and our European neighbours
to stop what is a European continent wide problem of human trafficking. George
Freeman, minister of State for Science. Thank you very much. Let's turn to the
newspapers and speaking of science and with the Telegraph continuing to release
contents of Matt Hancock's WhatsApp messages. Today's instalment includes what
Matt Hancock and his advisers thought at various points of Dame Kate Bingham,
the vaccines czar. At one point, she was branded totally unreliable and wacky by
ministers after she questioned the need to inoculate the entire population. That
happened in October 2020 when she gave an interview to the Financial Times. She
said, we just need to vaccinate everyone at risk. It's understood she was
following government policy at the time, says the Telegraph. But Mr Hancock, in
his exchanges with his special adviser on WhatsApp, said she has a wacky way of
expressing her views and is totally unreliable. She regards anything that isn't
her idea as political interference. And there's another exchange a few days
later in which they suspect her of leaking vaccine rollout plans to the
Economist. And the Telegraph says that it was about a month later that the
Sunday Times reports Dame Kate had spent £670,000 on PR consultants. Mr
Hancock's continued to say that it's a partial view of his messages that's been
released and that he's given them all to the Covid inquiry. A lot of coverage,
as you would expect, of what appears to be the government's plans on small
boats. The Guardian quoting a former minister saying, the proposals, if you
believe the briefings and the leaks, are a joke. And I can't see how they could
get on the statute. They look like an attempt to go into the general election
with some clear blue water between us and Labour. On the other hand, in the
Mail, Dominic Lawson, whose household currently has a couple of Ukrainians in
it, saying, it's precisely because I want this country to be a welcoming place
for people such as our Ukrainian guests that I believe it's necessary for Rishi
Sunak to do what he can to show the British people that we are not being made
fools of by those who have no respect for our borders. The time is now 17
minutes to eight. And it is a year this week since Sir Ernest Shackleton's ship,
the Endurance, was found in the Antarctic, relatively intact, 107 years after
disappearing beneath the ice. Strangely, it appeared not to be recorded in the
loss book at its insurers Lloyd's of London for the year 1915. But the polar
geographer Dr John Shears, who was part of the mission to find Endurance, has
been investigating further. He's with us, as is Sir Ernest's granddaughter,
Alexandra Shackleton. Morning to you both. Morning. Good morning, Michelle. Dr
Shears, what have you found? Well, we found the very entry for the Endurance in
the 1916 loss book of Lloyd's, kept down in the vaults of the Guildhall Library
in London. It's a record which is up there with a similar record of the Titanic.
So it's a very interesting discovery that we've made. And what does it actually
read, the entry? So I've got it in front of me here. It says Endurance British,
crushed by ice in the Weddell Sea and afterwards founded November the 20th,
1915. But they've actually scribbled out the date. They had put in an earlier
date, April the 9th, 1916, which was wrong. And the entry is still wrong,
because the actual date of sinking the vessel was the 21st of November, 1915.
But presumably in those days, maybe even today, that kind of thing does happen.
Well, yes, because Shackleton only managed to get the news back to the world and
to the UK that he was safe and that he'd lost his ship when he finally got to
the Falkland Islands on the 31st of May, 1916. He sent a telegram from the
Falklands and it was picked up by a paper, a big paper at the time, called the
Daily Chronicle. And they published in their paper that the ship had been lost
on April the 9th, 1916. So the waiters at Lloyd's didn't get it wrong. It was
the paper that got it wrong. But they did pay out, Lloyd's? So, yes, yeah, they
paid out within a month. And Alexandra, who you're speaking to next, she's got
all the records. So, yes, within the month, Lloyd's paid out and they paid the
full insurance. There are some implications of this, Alexandra, in terms of now
that we know the wreck has actually been found. Is it the case that you own it?
Yes, I own the wreck. The wreck was owned by the insurance companies when she
sank. But they formally handed over their interest to Ernest Shackle's
descendants, which is myself and my first cousin, Nick. And I suppose it was a
theoretical ownership, given that it was lost. But in this last year, now that
it's been found, have you, well, presumably you have the right to decide what
should happen to it? And my cousin, Nick, yes. She's going to be left where she
is. She's well over 3,000 metres down in the Weddell Sea. She is not going to be
touched. I'm very happy, and I'm sure Nick is, of people looking at her and
photographing her. But she's going to stay where she lies. And is that because
of the cost implications of bringing her up? No, it would be pretty well
impossible to bring a ship up from that depth. And she was a wooden ship. No,
this is where she should be. Right. You're not tempted to at least try and sort
of, I suppose she might well break up on the way up. But I was just saying it
would be an incredible thing in a museum or for people to be able to look at. Of
course, but that's how things are. I mean, all my life, I rather wondered
whether the Endurance would be found. But if she was found, I expect a pile of
spars. I don't expect these wonderful, beautiful images that John was talking
about. And if anyone doesn't remember them from last year, they're still on our
website and indeed lots of other places on the Internet to have a look at. Dr.
Shears, just a final thought. This idea that the insurer owns the wreck but then
essentially gives away the rights, was that a common thing? Oh, it was very,
very common and still very common today. Why does it happen? Because most
insurers want to pass the liability back to the owner. So today it's all about
the pollution risk of the wreck or there might be a navigation hazard. So the
insurer will pay out, but is left with the owner to clear up any resulting
pollution or navigation type hazard. One thing that I'd also like to say about
the ship. She's also protected, Endurance is protected on the seabed as part of
the Antarctic Treaty. So she's designated as a historic site and monument. So
that's another reason why she's going to stay there. Dr. John Shears and
Alexandra Shackleton, thank you. Twelve minutes to eight is the time. Time for
Thought for the Day. The speaker this morning is the Right Reverend Dr. David
Walker. Good morning. Sorry, as the old song goes, seems to be the hardest word.
It's a statement that would appear borne out by a news story that's held the
headlines of the last few days. A series of leaked WhatsApp messages has
demonstrated just how hard it can be to apologise for wrongdoing, especially
when saying sorry puts the guilty party's personal relationships or professional
career in jeopardy. Part of the problem with saying sorry is the suspicion that
our apology will be weaponised against us. We fear that someone will seek to
extract a penalty far beyond what we ourselves, who are admittedly far from
unbiased observers, consider proportionate. I can remember when insurers would
threaten to void policies should their clients admit to fault for even the most
cut and dried motor accident. No wonder that the time-hallowed tactics of deny,
deflect and delay are so often the wrongdoer's preferred path, none of which
creates a culture which supports saying sorry. My Christian faith, though, takes
me in a different direction. It encourages me, especially in this season of
Lent, to reflect on my failings and apologise to God. That might seem peculiar,
since most often God is not the direct victim of my misbehaviour. But confessing
my wrongdoing to someone who I'm absolutely sure will continue to love me and
forgive me, one who will never turn my apology against me, provides a stepping
stone towards my saying sorry to those I have directly offended. Three weeks ago
I stood on the dungeon of Ghana's Cape Coast Castle, from where Britain shipped
many thousands of slaves westwards. I was there as chair of a church fund whose
predecessor invested in the company running the shipping routes that traffic
human beings from Africa to the plantations. I stood alongside friends who are
the descendants of slaves, some of whose communities and nations still bear the
scars of slavery. The service of reconciliation we held allowed those of us who
remain beneficiaries of slavery to say, and to be heard saying, sorry to God and
our neighbours, and to make concrete commitments about the future, commitments
that begin to counter that shameful legacy. The wrongs of the past can't be
undone. Not everyone is able to accept apologies offered, don't expect them to.
The gap between what one party can offer and what the other can accept sometimes
proves unbridgeable. Yet the biblical call to love my neighbour compels me,
whether I am the aggressor or the aggrieved, to try. Sorry may be the hardest
word, both to utter and to hear, but it remains one of the most valuable in any
human language. And that was Thought for the Day with Dr David Walker. Brings us
to 10 to 8. Wayne Cousins will be sentenced today for indecent exposure. The
length of the term is irrelevant in the sense that the killer of Sarah Everard
is expected to spend the rest of his life in prison. But this latest conviction
raises the question of whether indecent exposure should be treated more
seriously as an indicator perhaps of a propensity for potential sexual assault.
He admitted to stepping out of a wood completely naked as a female cyclist went
past and exposing himself at least twice while in his car at a McDonald's drive-
thru. One of those occasions was only a few days before Sarah Everard was
abducted. He will be in court today for his sentencing, which will be televised.
Zoe Billingham joins us, Her Majesty's Inspector of Constabulary and Fire and
Rescue for 12 years. She sits on the government's Violence Against Women and
Girls Task Force. And Jennifer Grant is a criminologist at the University of
Portsmouth. Jennifer Grant, first of all, what do we know data-wise of any link
between indecent exposure offences and sexual assaults? Good morning. Well, we
do understand that there is a link in the research data that we have. We
understand that on average, approximately 5 to 10 percent of relevant men who
indecently expose themselves escalate into contact sexual offending. We also
know, don't we, that most people who are convicted of indecent exposure are not
jailed? That is correct. Yes, that is correct. So most of their sentences are
suspended? That's correct. Often, although they don't go to jail, they are
managed by the police and by the probation service, often jointly. And you're
obviously very familiar with all these kinds of offences. Have you reached the
conclusion that we need to deal with indecent exposure more seriously? I
certainly have. I think generally as it being a sexual offence and a facet of
sexual violence perpetrated by men towards women, but also, as you just said, as
an indicator of potentially future harm and escalations in the worst cases like
cousins. So, Billigan, what do you think? Morning, Michelle. Well, I think
there's an epidemic of flashing going on, which isn't being dealt with in a
serious way that it deserves. Flashing, as Jennifer said, indecent exposure,
it's an act of aggression by a man on a woman. It's a demonstration of sexual
entitlement and it is a precursor crime. It may be one in 10 of these offenders
go on to commit much more serious crimes. But with 13,000 reported crimes,
Michelle, that's the tip of the iceberg. We know this is a hugely underreported
crime. And with only 120 cases last year actually going to prison and for less
than six months, we clearly need to treat this more seriously. Look, what woman
hasn't been flashed at? I most certainly have way back when. 80% of girls
between 12 and 18 have received cyber flashing. You know, there is a cultural
issue, isn't there, here, Michelle, that we really need to get to grips with.
And the police play a really important part in responding appropriately when
these crimes are reported. We use euphemisms really around this. You said
flashing, indecent exposure. I wonder if people who it hasn't happened to might
struggle to realise just how frightening it is. Because when you talk to women
who have experienced it and, you know, as you say, you have. It happened to me
when I was a girl. I talked to other women who it happened to. It is a very
frightening thing. You feel that absolute sense of someone's power over you at
that moment. And it is precisely that. It is this kind of demonstration, this
marking of territory by a man against a woman, isn't it? And there is this
innuendo, isn't there, this sort of nudge, nudge, wink, wink. You know, way back
when it was it wasn't even seen as a sexual offence. It was seen as a nuisance
crime and was treated as that. But it is now seen as a sexual offence. And the
important thing is that it is reported that the police act and investigate, that
they charge and convict. A man found guilty will go on the sexual offences
register. I think it's really important that we do recognise this crime for what
it is and the effect that it has on us as women. You said charge and convict.
You didn't say and jail, because that seems to be one of the things that doesn't
happen to the majority of people convicted of this crime. No, Michelle, you are
quite right. You know, the fact that out of 13000 reported crimes, only 100
resulted in around around 100 resulted in jail sentences and usually less than
six months. And we know that the man won't serve anything like that time. So I
think that there is a really serious message that needs to be given in our
society, that this is a crime that will not be tolerated. And I think we do need
to look hard at the sentencing guidelines and whether or not when someone is
convicted that they are given a harsh enough sentence. So it does act, as you
rightly say, it does act as that deterrent as it must. Is there evidence,
Jennifer Grant, from from your work that it does act as a deterrent, that if
someone is convicted of this, that it sort of acts as a real warning of of how
seriously society will take these sorts of issues? There's not research
evidence, as it were, Michelle, but certainly from anecdotal evidence, that
process of going through the court system can act as a deterrent for some men,
which is why we don't then see them back in that system. And Zoe Billingham, do
you think that is this going to be something that the task force that you're
part of considers? Certainly, I've been talking to police officers about this
particular crime, and what I do know is that police forces up and down the
country recognise this now as a red flag crime, and particularly where there's
repeat offenders, they're seeing that as a very serious offence, and
particularly in public spaces as well. So police forces are now looking to take
affirmative action in terms of tracking down these perpetrators as they rightly
should. Zoe Billingham, Jennifer Grant, thank you both very much. Three minutes
to eight to the weather, Chris Fawkes. Hi Justin, and the risk of some
disruptive snow around over the next couple of days. The initial focus actually
across parts of Scotland and north-east England over the hills 10 to 20
centimetres, but at lower elevations 5 to 10, more than enough to cause some
localised disruption, and the snow will be drifting around in the fairly strong
northerly winds that we'll have as well. Now weather-wise, that colder air has
started to spread its way southwards behind a weather front in Scotland, so we
are seeing showers increasingly turn to snow, so things could get quite tricky
across northern areas really through the rest of the day today. Elsewhere in
Scotland, the weather will at least tend to brighten up for a time with some
sunny spells around as that colder air starts to work its way in. Now for
Northern Ireland, England and Wales, predominantly there's a lot of cloud around
this morning with some patches of light rain and drizzle. The weather probably
turning a bit brighter for Northern England and Northern Ireland later on this
afternoon as the cold air works in, wouldn't rule out a few wintry showers
starting up later on today. Now temperatures across the south of the UK, around
6 to 8 degrees Celsius, quite similar to what we've seen over the weekend, but
across northern Scotland it gets colder through the day today really, with
temperatures struggling to get much above freezing. Now overnight tonight, that
snow risk continues for northern Scotland, eastern Scotland and north-east
England with some tricky conditions around. There'll be a widespread frost
across northern areas, but in the south still quite cloudy, bit of rain
potentially turning to sleet or perhaps a bit of snow for a time. And then
looking ahead, I think into Tuesday night and into Wednesday, we might well see
the risk of some disruptive snow in the south, so certainly one to watch. That's
the latest. Chris, thank you very much. Whatever you're looking for, we've got
sounds for that. Join us for topical conversation that informs, challenges,
inspires and really gets you thinking on Woman's Hour. Or relax and unwind with
the rich musical textures of the Mindful Mix. Or throw caution to the wind and
enjoy Friday night comedy whenever you darn well please, like on a Tuesday or
even not at night with the sensationally time-flexible Friday Night Comedy. We
are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party
services and platforms and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds....the actor
Ruth Wilson on performing on stage for 24 hours straight....you're listening
to...