TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 explains why Ukrainian culture has become a symbol of defiance. This is the BBC
World Service, the world's radio station. Hello and welcome to Newsday on the
BBC World Service with Rob Young and Catherine Biarohanga. Foreign ministers
from the group of 20 nations are gathering in India with divisions over the war
in Ukraine expected to dominate the summit. Delhi has long-standing security
ties with Russia and has refused to condemn Moscow's invasion. In Nigeria,
Bolotinibu has reached out to opposition parties after his victory in Nigeria's
election, but reports of irregularities in the votes are likely to see
opposition parties go to court. We had reports that instead of opening at half
eight, they were opening at 11 o'clock or at midday and in some cases not at
all. So this clearly hindered people's capacity to vote. And scientists say
they're planning to use human brain cells to construct a new kind of computer.
But is it ethical? All that after the latest world news. BBC News, hello, I'm
Gareth Barlow. India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi has urged foreign ministers
from the G20 group of major economies to find common ground at the start of a
meeting likely to be dominated by Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Mr Modi said
that issues which could not be agreed on should not come in the way of those
that could be solved together. In the land of Gandhi and the Buddha, I pray that
you will draw inspiration from India's civilizational ethos to focus not on what
divides us, but on what unites us. India, which holds the G20 presidency, has
taken a neutral stance on the Ukraine conflict and will try to steer the agenda
of today's meeting in Delhi towards the needs of poorer nations. The United
States has denounced comments by Israel's far-right finance minister, Bezel
Mosmoderich, who had called for the Palestinian village of Huwara to be wiped
out. The village in the occupied West Bank was the scene of a rampage by Jewish
settlers on Sunday. With more details, here's our North America correspondent,
David Willis. The Biden administration has become increasingly critical of the
actions and the words from the right-wing government of Benjamin Netanyahu,
particularly in regard to the expansion of Israeli settlements into Palestinian
land. The administration condemned the rampage by Israeli settlers through that
Palestinian village on Sunday, and it called for those who were responsible to
be brought to book. Well, now the administration has accused a senior member of
the Netanyahu administration of incitement to violence. The BBC's David Willis
there. The Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis says a committee of experts
will investigate the causes of Tuesday night's rail disaster that saw two trains
collide, killing at least 43 people. Mr Mitsotakis said everything pointed to
human error being to blame, but rail union members say safety systems weren't
working properly and there had been repeated warnings about this. Nick Beek has
this report. Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis has angered many Greeks with his
swift assessment given at the scene of the country's worst ever rail disaster
that it can be blamed on tragic human error. A 59-year-old station master has
been charged with manslaughter by negligence, but there were repeated warnings
over many years about the safety of the rail network. Outside one of the
hospitals where the bodies of victims have been brought hangs a banner claiming
that any systemic failings will be covered up in the official investigation now
underway. You're listening to the World News from the BBC. The leader of North
Korea has said that farms must meet their grain production goals without fail
amid reports that the country is facing a food crisis. At a meeting of the
ruling party, Kim Jong-un called for better irrigation systems and machinery and
said that all farmers should focus on increasing their per hectare yield. Power
has largely been restored across Argentina after more than half the country was
left without electricity for several hours. Will Grant reports. With the South
American nation still in its summer months, much of the country is experiencing
a heat wave and a drought with temperatures in some reasons consistently above
35 degrees. An estimated 20 million Argentinians have been affected by the
blackout at its height and daily life has been brought to a halt in some regions
with classes suspended and businesses shuttered. The biggest complications are
in the major cities. An estimated 150,000 people are still without power in the
Buenos Aires metropolitan area. The blackout is believed to have been caused by
a large fire in the coastal region which brought down crucial power lines and
forced a nuclear power station called Atucha One to be taken offline out of
caution. New York City has agreed to pay just over $21,000 each to hundreds of
demonstrators who were penned in by police during racial justice protests in
2020. It follows a lawsuit by five of the demonstrators who accuse officers of a
brutal response to the protests that followed the murder of George Floyd by
Minneapolis police officers. Ornithologists are celebrating the sighting of a
dusky tetraker, a yellow-throated songbird native to Madagascar which was feared
to have become extinct. The bird had not been seen since 1999 but three have now
been sighted in recent weeks near rivers in the biodiverse rainforests of
northeast Madagascar. Much of the forest has been converted into vanilla
producing farms curtailing the bird's natural habitat. BBC News. Thank you for
that news and welcome to Newsday on the BBC World Service with Catherine Biarra-
Hunger and Rob Young. Coming up this half hour we've got stories for you from
India, Nigeria and the United States. We'll also hear from a scientist who's
trying to develop a computer that would be powered by human brain cells. But
should they do that? Send us your thoughts on our text number that's plus 4477
86 20 50 85. Well let's head to India which is playing host to various meetings
of the group of 20 which is made up of the world's most powerful economies.
Foreign ministers are arriving and are expected to include the top diplomats
from the United States, Russia and China. These days any meeting of
international leaders seems fraught with tension as the global divisions caused
by the war in Ukraine are on full display. So India's Prime Minister Narendra
Modi has called on those people gathering in Delhi to find common ground on
divisive issues saying as you may have heard in the news a few minutes ago we
should not allow issues that we cannot resolve together to come in the way of
those we can. Well on the line is Sir Hassini Haidar the diplomatic affairs
editor for The Hindu and is at that summit of world leaders. Thanks so much for
joining us. How much do you think India can really achieve in this meeting? It
says it is neutral when it comes to Russia's invasion of Ukraine but many
western nations say it's actually picked aside. Well absolutely and thank you
for inviting me on the show. India is in a difficult spot until a few years, a
few months ago it seemed India was in the sweet spot where it kept its relations
with Russia. It continued to buy oil at increasing levels while it continued to
keep its ties with a western world and you have heard from western leaders
really a lot of praise for Prime Minister Modi's earlier words that this era is
not of war. But now India is in the hot seat because it is the host of the G20
this year and the foreign ministers meeting that is taking place today, there
are over two sessions about six hours in all of deliberations, is going to
really set the agenda for the year ahead and for the summit in September. If
they can't forge some kind of consensus and our finance ministers meeting of the
G20 ministers last week was not able to forge that consensus. If they can't find
a consensus right now between what is increasingly being seen as the Russia-
China combine coming out in the open on one side and the G7 and western-led
countries on the other, then it makes it that much more difficult for India. So
it is a difficult position to be in. It's difficult but where does India sit
when you look at those two opposite camps? It's trying to have it both ways
isn't it and when you hear what western nations are saying it's not really
possible as far as they are concerned to remain neutral when it comes to
Russia's behaviour in Ukraine and have incredibly close relations with the West.
Well the truth is western nations have also changed the goalposts a bit because
in the beginning they said don't buy oil from Russia. More recently we've heard
buy oil from Russia so long as it's below a certain price, a price cap of about
60 dollars. In fact the US most recently said it actually helps us if India buys
more oil from Russia at lower prices because it keeps the oil market stable and
Russia doesn't get as much revenue as before. So even you know there's been a
lot of goalpost shifting on all sides but it is true. India has said that its
position is actually with neither side. That while the conflict clearly makes
Indian leaders uncomfortable they have not so far criticised Russia's war in
Ukraine. So far India has abstained from 20 odd votes at the UNGA, at the UN
Security Council, at the IAEA, the Human Rights Council. India has abstained
every time a resolution comes around that seeks to criticise Russia. On the
other hand India has as I said increased its oil intake and has been keeping its
ties close with western countries. We've had a string of western countries come
through. German Chancellor Olaf Scholz was here, he'll be back in September. The
Italian Prime Minister is here right now, she'll be back in September. Mr
Blinken is here, he's been here for the meeting of course and Prime Minister
Modi will meet US President Biden a few times this year, Prime Minister Sunak as
well. So India is trying right now to keep its relations with everyone as well
as possible and as I said they have the added responsibility as host of the G20.
Yeah and briefly are all of the foreign ministers in one room? So will we see
the American Secretary of State Antony Blinken in the same room as Russia's
Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov? You know that's an interesting question. Yes
they are in the same room at present, at least for the opening session. The rest
of it has been taken off air so the media is out of the room and there are no
links to the session so we don't exactly know how many stayed. In the past year
what we have seen is many boycott the Russian statement. The Russian Foreign
Minister has often walked out straight after he gives his own statement so he
doesn't listen to others. It will be hard to tell but certainly in the beginning
they all came together. What's important though is that they have not yet so far
come together for what is called a family photo of all the G20 countries
together. They didn't do that in Indonesia, they're not expected to do it here.
Like many families there is a row. Thank you. Sir Harsini Haider there,
Diplomatic Affairs Editor at The Hindu. Outside that group of 20 foreign
ministers meeting taking place in Delhi. Nigeria's opposition Labour Party says
it will mount a legal challenge against the presidential election victory of
Bola Tinubu of the governing APC. Mr Tinubu won the presidential elections with
37 percent of votes but the polls billed as the most competitive since the
country transitioned to democracy have been marred in controversy. The
opposition has disputed the results and called for a re-election. Our
correspondent Mayoni Jones is in Lagos where Mr Tinubu was the candidate was the
governor from 1999 to 2007. Marching to the beat of their own drums, Bola
Tinubu's supporters in the southwestern state of Iquiti, the first to be
declared in his favour, danced on the streets to celebrate his win. In his
victory speech Mr Tinubu thanked those who voted for him. I am profoundly
humbled that you have elected me to serve as the 16th president of our beloved
country. This is a shining moment in the life of any man and affirmation of our
democratic existence. Outside his mansion in the upscale neighbourhood of Iquiti
in Lagos, a few well-wishers are gathered. It's the Messiah of our time. His
image as the president of the federal department of Nigeria is the will of God.
So, and I believe he's going to do what Nigerians are expecting him to do for
them. I believe there's much to do and I believe there's much the president is
ready to give to the youth. We are so happy. A former pro-democracy activist, Mr
Tinubu was forced into exile in the 90s and came back just as the country
returned to democracy. At his inauguration as Lagos state governor in 1999, he
promised to develop the city. Our goal is to lighten the burden of our people,
alleviate poverty by providing houses, water, good roads. Nicknamed the
Godfather of Lagos, he's credited with reshaping Nigeria's commercial hub. Every
governor who succeeded him has been one of his protégés. But there are concerns
his health may not be good enough to handle this nation's complex challenges.
During the campaign, the speculation surrounding his well-being was so intense,
he filed a proof of life video of himself on an exercise bike. The caption read,
I am strong, I am healthy and I am ready to serve Nigerians from day one. But in
Anambra, the home state of opposition candidate Peter Obi, there's frustration.
After all our efforts, everything just went in vain. This is not the kind of
result we all expected. So I'm very, very hurt. Let them just cancel it because
this one is like they have put corruption on it. They don't want to tell us the
truth. If they want to bring the original result, let them cancel it. We don't
want it. Mr Tinubu denies allegations of corruption and says the vote was fair,
but the opposition claims it was rigged, a feeling shared by many Nigerians.
Observers admit there were issues with the new electronic voting system. Barry
Andrews heads the European Union's observer mission. There was problems
uploading presidential election results, unlike the uploading of House of
Representatives and Senate election results. There was a lot of chaos in
collation centres. Sometimes collation officers weren't present. And in all of
this confusion, INEC didn't really communicate what the problems were to a
sufficient extent. And so it lent a lack of transparency to the election and
undermined public trust in the integrity of the process. Is it your
understanding that the late opening of the polls may have had an impact on the
turnout, which seems a lot lower than anticipated? Regularly, we had reports
that instead of opening at half eight, which was the time they were supposed to
open at on Saturday morning, they were opening at 11 o'clock or midday, and in
some cases not at all. So this clearly hindered people's capacity to vote. Mr
Tinubu has an uphill battle to unite the country and rescue its declining
economy. He also has to restore security to large swathes of the nation, which
are under the control of armed militants and criminal gangs. It's a tall order.
The BBC's Mayoni Jones reporting from Lagos and here with the sports news today
is Isaac Fanning. Yeah, Arsenal have built up a five point lead at the top of
the Premier League as they beat Everton 4-0 at the Emirates. Two goals from
Gabriel Martinelli and one each from Bukaya Saka and captain Martin Odegaard
sealed the win. Elsewhere, Liverpool gutted out a 2-0 victory over Wolves,
Virgil van Dijk and Egypt's Mo Salah on the score sheet. There was a massive
shock in the FA Cup as England's third tier side Grimsby Town beat Southampton
2-1 to set up a quarterfinal clash away at Brighton. Manchester United came from
a goal down to beat West Ham United 2-1 and another shock, Spurs were knocked
out by Sheffield United as Senegal international Irma Anandjai scored the only
goal. To cricket next, a hearing into allegations of racism at one of England's
biggest domestic cricket sides, Yorkshire, has been told that former England
bowler Tim Bresnan used a racial slur towards a fellow player, Azim Rafiq's
sister. Rafiq claimed Bresnan used the term towards his sister Amna during a
media day at Headingley in 2014. Bresnan denies the allegations, the claim were
part of evidence heard on the first day of the Cricket Discipline Commission
hearing into alleged racism at Yorkshire County Cricket Club. Thank you Isaac.
More sport in about 20 minutes with Isaac, we're going to get some business news
now and Katie Silva joins us from the business desk in Singapore. Hello again
Katie, hope you're well. Let's talk about the electric car maker Tesla, it says
it's going to cut assembly costs, it hopes in half when it comes to future
generations of cars. Has it said how it's going to do that? It hasn't and it
hasn't even really revealed what these future generations of cars are going to
look like. One may think that one way that they might do this is by its move to
open a giant gigafactory in the Mexican state of Nuevo Leon. So as part of a
huge meeting between investors and Tesla executives at the company's
headquarters in Austin, Texas, that was one announcement that was confirmed, it
had been flagged by the country's Prime Minister a day so prior but it was
confirmed by Elon Musk and they discussed a whole host of things but investors
clearly not that excited by it. We saw shares drop about five percent in after
hours trading off the back of this three-hour meeting. Many were hoping that the
company might debut a much-awaited affordable electric vehicle, it's hoped for
example that a cheaper version of Tesla may broaden the brand's appeal, that
didn't happen so investors were a little bit unhappy about that as well as the
fact that we saw them flag how expensive it might be for them to meet their
future targets. They say for example it could cost $175 billion to hit its
target to increase output to about 20 million vehicles each year by 2030. So a
huge amount and more roller coasters for those Tesla investors, Rob. Yeah, a lot
of them betting on Elon Musk directly as well as the product of course. Thank
you, Katie. This is Newsday from the BBC World Service. And that's where we
break away from the BBC World Service and set our sights on Thursday morning
here on BBC Radio 4. Hello, this is Jane Steel. Farming Today will be hearing
about the 10-point plan just published by the National Farming Union on how to
boost UK horticulture. That's at a quarter to six and then a bird synonymous
with the North East enjoys its spotlight in our tweet of the day just before the
top of the hour. Stand by for the Shipping Bulletin and News Briefing after this
look ahead to next week. There's a crisis in UK music education. In today's
climate there's a lot less funding available to support many young musicians who
would like to pursue their interest. I'm Soweto Kinch, a musician myself, and in
a new three-part series, I'll be finding out why the future of British music is
under threat. If you don't have adequate provision in our schools, that is going
to have an impact on the talent pipeline and it is going to have an impact in
terms of the diversity of that talent pipeline. Is it in danger of becoming an
elitist occupation? Rethinking music on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds starts next
Tuesday morning at 11.30. Now here's Helen Willets. Jane, thank you. Good
morning. It's time for the shipping forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf
of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 05.05 today, Thursday 2nd March 2023.
The general synopsis at midnight. High Faroes 1038, expected Hebrides 1034 by
midnight tonight. The area forecast for the next 24 hours. Viking north at zero.
Variable four or less, becoming northerly or northeasterly, backing
northwesterly later, three to five. Fair. Good. South at zero. East 40s.
Variable four or less, becoming northerly or northwesterly, four or five,
occasionally six in south at zero. Fair. Good. West 40s. Cromarty.
Northeasterly, three to five, backing northwesterly, two to four. Showers at
first. Good. Fourth. Northeast four or five, backing north, two to four.
Showers. Good. Tyne, Dogger. Easterly, becoming variable, then northerly, two to
four, increasing five later in east Dogger. Showers at first. Good. Fisher,
German Bight. Northeast two to four, backing north or northwesterly, two to
four. Backing north or northwest, three to five, occasionally six later. Fair.
Fogpatches in German Bight. Good. Occasionally very poor in German Bight.
Humber. Northeast three to five. Fair. Good. Thames, Dover, White. Northeast
four to six. Fair. Good. Portland, Plymouth. Northeast three to five. Showers at
first. Good. Occasionally moderate at first. Biscay. North or northeast, three
or four, occasionally five later. Showers. Good. Occasionally moderate. Fitzroy,
Seoul. Easterly or northeasterly, but southeasterly in west, two to four,
occasionally five in Fitzroy. Showers. Good. Lundy, Fasnet. East or northeast,
three or four, occasionally five at first in Fasnet. Showers at first. Good.
Irish Sea. East or northeast, two to four. Showers at first. Good. Shannon,
Rockall. East or southeast, two to four, occasionally five at first in Shannon.
Showers. Good. Malin, Hebrides. East or northeast, three or four, occasionally
five in Malin, becoming variable three or less. Showers. Good. Bailey. Variable
four or less. Showers. Good. Fair Isle. Variable four or less, becoming
northwest, four to six. Fair. Good. Faroes. Variable four or less, becoming
west, three to five, veering northwest, four to six later. Fair. Good. And
finally, southeast Iceland. Westerly or southwesterly, two to four, increasing
four to six, veering northwestly, three to five later. Showers. Good. And now
the weather reports from coastal stations for 0400 on today, the 2nd of March
2023. Tyree Automatic. Northeast by east, three, 15 miles, 1032, falling.
Stornoway. Northwest, two, 15 miles, 1034, falling. Lerwick. Northeast by north,
two, 19 miles, 1033, falling. Lucas. North northeast, three, 15 miles, 1031, now
rising. Bridlington. Southeast by east, three, 1027, falling more slowly.
Sandese Light Vessel Automatic. Northeast by east, five, 11 miles, 1023.
Greenwich Light Vessel Automatic, two miles, 1023. Jersey. Northeast by east,
three. Channel Light Vessel Automatic. Northeast by east, five, 1023. Scilly
Automatic. Northeast, three, 22 miles, 1024, falling slowly. Valencia. Northeast
by east, three, 24 miles, 1027, falling. Ronaldsway. Northeast, two, 1028,
falling. Mallinhead. East, three, recent drizzle, 27 miles, 1031, falling. And
here's the weather forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland valid for the following 24 hours and again issued by the Met Office at
0500 on today, Thursday, the 2nd of March 2023. The general situation, high
pressure will persist to the northwest of the UK during the next couple of days,
maintaining light, mainly northeasterly winds across the coastal waters, but
strong for a time in the far southeast. So for Cape Wrath to Rattray Head,
including Orkney, northeasterly, three or four, becoming variable three or less,
then northwesterly two to four later, showers at first. Good. Rattray Head to
Berwick-upon-Tweed. Northeasterly, four or five, backing northerly, three or
four later, showers. Good. Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby. Easterly or
northeasterly, two to four, becoming variable three or less, showers at first.
Good. Whitby to Gibraltar Point. Easterly or northeasterly, backing north, two
to four, showers at first. Good. Gibraltar Point to North Forland.
Northeasterly, four or five, occasionally six near North Forland. Fair. Good.
North Forland to Celsie Bill. Northeasterly, four to six. Fair. Good. Celsie
Bill to Lyme Regis. Northeasterly, three to five. Fair. Good. Lyme Regis to
Land's End, including the Isles of Scilly. Northeasterly, three to five, showers
at first. Good. Land's End to St. David's Head, including the Bristol Channel.
Northeasterly, three or four, showers at first. Good. St. David's Head to Great
Orm Head, including the St. George's Channel. Easterly or northeasterly, two to
four, showers at first. Good. Great Orm Head to the Mull of Galloway. Easterly
or northeasterly, two to four, becoming variable three or less, showers at
first. Variable three or less, showers at first. Good. Isle of Man.
Northeasterly, varying easterly, three or four, becoming variable three or less,
then easterly, two or three later, showers at first. Good. Loughboil to
Carlingford Lough. Easterly or northeasterly, three to five, becoming variable
three or less, showers. Good. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre, including the
Firth of Clyde and North Channel. Northeasterly, three to five, becoming
variable three or less, showers, fair later. Good. Mull of Kintyre to
Ardnamachan Point. Easterly or northeasterly, three or four, becoming variable
three or less later, showers. Good. Ardnamachan Point to Cape Wrath. Easterly or
northeasterly, three or four, becoming variable three or less, fair. Good. And
finally, the Shetland Isles. Variable three or less, becoming northerly three or
four, backing northwesterly four or five later, the weather fair, the visibility
good. And that completes the Shipping Bulletin, Jane. I'll have a general
weather forecast in just a few minutes for you. Thank you, Helen. This is BBC
Radio 4. It's half past five on Thursday, March the 2nd. Good morning. This is
News Briefing with Jane Steel. The latest leak of pandemic WhatsApp messages
suggests Matt Hancock wanted schools in England closed against the wishes of the
Education Secretary. Police are continuing to question a couple arrested in
Brighton following the discovery of a baby's body. In business, a report has
found the government made almost two and a half billion pounds selling mortgages
from collapsed lenders to investment firms after the 2008 financial crisis. And
in sport, Arsenal have moved five points clear at the top of the Premier League.
Further, WhatsApp messages sent by the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock
suggest he was determined to overturn a government decision to keep schools in
England open as Covid cases rose steadily at the end of 2020. His wishes put him
in direct conflict with the then Education Secretary Sir Gavin Williamson, who
opposed closing them. In the latest messages published by the Daily Telegraph,
Mr Hancock told an aide they needed to fight a rearguard action against the
policy, which was subsequently reversed in January 2021. A post-mortem
examination is to be carried out on the body of a baby found by police searching
for the missing child of Constance Martin and Mark Gordon. The remains were
discovered in an area of woodland near Brighton, close to where the couple were
detained on Monday. Detective Superintendent Lewis Bassford is from the
Metropolitan Police. This is an outcome that myself and that many officers who
have been part of this search had hoped would not happen. I recognise the impact
this news will have on the many people who have been following the story closely
and can assure them that we will do everything we possibly can to establish what
has happened. The final report on the Manchester Arena bombing will be published
this afternoon and will concentrate on the role of the security services. 22
people were killed in the blast after an Ariana Grande concert in 2017. The
Greek Prime Minister has blamed what he called tragic human error for the train
crash on Tuesday night, which killed at least 43 people. More than 70 others are
in hospital after the head-on collision between a passenger service and a
freight train. The government has announced that it's building additional
special free schools in England for children and young people with special
educational needs and disabilities. There'll be an extra 33 of the schools on
top of the 49 already approved. Ministers are also boosting numbers of special
needs coordinators and educational psychologists. Charities say the system is in
crisis, with children who need support facing long delays before receiving it.
But the Education Secretary, Gillian Keegan, said the extra resources would make
a difference. They need extra support. That support should be available. You
shouldn't need to get an EHCP plan to make sure that that support is available.
So that's one of the things we're also doing with mainstream schools. I mean,
this is for everybody just to improve how we deal with special educational
needs. Now, it will take time because it is complex. Russia's Deputy Foreign
Minister Sergei Ryabkov is in Geneva today to attend meetings at the United
Nations. Despite some attempts to isolate Moscow diplomatically because of the
invasion of Ukraine, Russia remains a permanent member of the UN Security
Council, a position which grants Moscow a good deal of power and influence among
member states. The UK's biggest story writing competition for children, 500
Words, is returning to the BBC after three years. Teachers and librarians will
join leading authors to judge this year's submissions. The winner will be
announced next year. The children's author, Frank Codrell-Boyce, is one of the
judges. Everyone's got a story. Everyone can tell a story. We just talked today
about, you know, what important days in your life, and every single one of them
had a different story. Any genre that you want, or as personal as you want,
anything at all, as long as it's got you in it. And now Helen Willets is back
with today's weather. Jane, thank you very much indeed. Hello there. February,
the driest for 30 years, especially in England. We haven't seen much rain, even
in Scotland, only about 70% of the average rainfall fell and little sign of any
rainfall, at least till the end of the working week and into the weekend. It is
a very similar weather pattern as we heard on the weather on the shipping
bulletin to yesterday with the high pressure across the country. So that's why
it's drier at the moment. But there'll be some subtle changes on yesterday's
weather. We start the day with frost in both the north of Scotland and the far
south of England, the Midlands and East Anglia, where the skies have stayed
clearest, longest overnight. So yes, a little frosty to start, a few icy bits on
the car, certainly. And then we've got a few showery bursts of rain still with
us across parts of Northern Ireland, Southern Scotland, Northern England and the
north of Wales. But gradually, I think, through the day ahead, the cloud will
break a little more across parts of the Midlands, the north Midlands into the
north west of England into Wales as well to reveal a bit more sunshine. We
should keep the sunshine further south across the Midlands, southern England. We
might just pick up a bit more cloud into the afternoon though across East
Anglia. It's likely that parts of the north and east of England across Northern
Ireland, Southern Scotland will keep a thicker cloud today and the odd light
shower around, but some good sunshine coming out elsewhere. It's slightly less
breezy than it was yesterday, so it won't feel quite as chilly, but temperatures
still only six to nine, about average for the time of year, perhaps pushing 10
in the south. And it's high pressure all the way again tomorrow, Jane. Helen
Willetts, thank you. Time for a look at the papers. For a second day, the Daily
Telegraph leads on the leak of pandemic WhatsApp messages, this time suggesting
that Matt Hancock mounted what's described as a rearguard action to close
schools in England, despite the then Education Secretary Sir Gavin Williamson
battling tooth and nail to keep them open. Writing in the Telegraph, Sir Gavin
ponders whether he should have resigned when it was announced that schools would
close for a second time, as he felt so personally upset about it. He says his
plea to put pupils first was ignored, leaving him absolutely crushed and
devastated. He says that what was most upsetting was that he felt it wasn't done
for the right reasons, that in the first lockdown there was no choice but to
obey medical advice, but further into the pandemic, data showed low levels of
pupil absence due to Covid. The Telegraph quotes the journalist that leaked the
messages, Isabel Oakeshott, saying the closure of schools was the most egregious
travesty of the pandemic, adding she was motivated to leak the messages due to
what she describes as the appalling disregard for the well-being of young
people. Ms Oakeshott was given copies of the messages while helping Mr Hancock
write his book, Pandemic Diaries. The Guardian says by entrusting 100,000
official WhatsApp messages to a journalist known to be an outspoken critic of
lockdowns, confidence in the Covid inquiry has been undermined. The online-only
Independent dubs the fury the WhatsApp war, adding that Rishi Sunak is now under
pressure to fast-track the inquiry to provide answers to questions raised by the
leak. Focusing on the earlier allegations that Mr Hancock rejected advice about
testing procedures for care homes, the Metro says grieving families are
sickened. The Mirror calls it the tragic betrayal. The Times reports that
millions of patients will be offered help to come off antidepressants and
painkillers under an NHS drive to tackle addiction to prescription pills. It
says the plan aims to avoid a US-style opioid crisis and will recommend patients
instead be sent to art, music or gardening classes. The Eye has an exclusive
front-page story reporting that UK chickens may be vaccinated against bird flu
as a way of trying to stop it spreading to humans. The Daily Mail says that
Carrie Johnson, the wife of Boris Johnson, has appealed to the Justice Secretary
not to allow the release of a man jailed for the killing of his estranged wife
halfway through a 26-year sentence. The paper says Mrs Johnson believes the law
is letting women down. The reaction of the Duke and Duchess of Sussex to being
told to give up Frogmore Cottage also attracts front-page coverage. The Daily
Express quotes an ally of the couple describing it as like a cruel punishment.
It says King Charles has dealt the couple a crushing blow in what royal insiders
describe as an act of revenge. The Sun says they are stunned and its front page
includes a mocked-up eviction notice from King Charles saying it takes effect
immediately after one's coronation and the reason is your ghastly book, the
appalling Netflix series and making the United States your country of primary
residence. Now Business. A new report funded by the money expert Martin Lewis
suggests the government made almost two and a half billion pounds selling
mortgages from collapsed lenders to investment firms after the financial crisis.
The details from Katie Silver. After 2008 when a number of mortgage providers
collapsed, the government sold around 200,000 mortgages to firms which aren't
regulated to offer new deals. Since then homeowners with these mortgages have
been stuck on higher rates and many can't switch loan providers because they do
not meet tough and borrowing criteria brought in after the crisis. Martin Lewis,
the founder of the money-saving expert website, says the government needs to
free these mortgage prisoners while the Treasury has said it would consider all
proposals put forward. The electric car maker Tesla says it will cut the costs
of assembly by half in future generations of cars as it prepares to open a
gigafactory in Mexico. Speaking at an investor day in Texas, the company's chief
executive Elon Musk said a new factory would be the biggest electric vehicle
plant in the world. Shares however fell by five percent in after hours trading
with many investors disappointed the company didn't lay out a plan to make a
much awaited small affordable electric vehicle. A bill which would give
President Joe Biden the power to ban Chinese-owned TikTok in the United States
has passed the first of three legislative hurdles. Lawmakers in the House
Foreign Affairs Committee voted 24 to 16 to approve the measure. It will now
need to be passed by both the full house and then the Senate to become law. In
the markets last night on Wall Street the Dow Jones ended flat at 32,662 and the
FTSE 100 gained half a percent finishing at 7,914. In Japan a short time ago the
Nikkei 225 was also trading flat at 27,496. On the currency markets the pound is
trading at 1.20 against the euro sterling is at 1.13. That makes a euro 89
pence. Now sport and in football Arsenal have moved five points clear at the top
of the Premier League. With news of that and the rest of the headlines here's
Paul Sarris. Gabriele Martinelli scored twice with Bukayo Saka and Martin Udagar
also on the score sheet as the Gunners thrashed Everton 4-0 at the Emirates
Stadium. Elsewhere Liverpool were 2-0 winners over struggling Wolverhampton
Wanderers at Anfield. League 2 Grimsby Town beat Southampton 2-1 at St Mary's to
reach the quarterfinals of the FA Cup for the first time in 84 years. They
travel to Brighton next. The League Cup winners Manchester United came from a
goal down to beat West Ham 3-1 and set up a home tie against Fulham. Elsewhere
Sheffield United will host Blackburn Rovers after a 1-0 win over Tottenham and
Burnley beat Fleetwood Town 1-0. The Clarets go to Manchester City next. In
cricket the former England bowler Tim Bresnan used a racial slur towards Azim
Rafiq's sister. A hearing into allegations of racism at Yorkshire has been told.
Rafiq claimed Bresnan used the term towards his sister Amna during a media day
at Headingley in 2014. Bresnan who is not taking part in the process denies the
allegation and the France prop Mohamed Ouas will miss the rest of the Six
Nations after being banned for four weeks following his red card against
Scotland last weekend. Finally a glance back at some of the stories that were
making news on this date in earlier years. In 2004 Alistair Cook broadcast his
last letter from America 58 years after presenting his first. Good morning
propped up there against my usual three pillows and reluctantly having just
finished a favourite bed book the collected ribbled musings of an old friend
Charles McCabe. I was feeling chipper enough to glance across the two bedside
piles and hope for a perfect lullaby before drifting into sleep. On this day
last year the Russian media outlets RT and Sputnik were banned from broadcasting
across Europe after the EU accused them of spreading misinformation and
propaganda about the invasion of Ukraine. The ban was part of a larger package
of sanctions against Russia. In 1995 the rogue trader Nick Leeson was arrested
at Frankfurt airport after a week-long manhunt. His multi-million pound dealings
on the high-risk derivatives market in Singapore led to the collapse of Baring's
Bank. In 1969 Concorde made its maiden flight from Toulouse and was in the air
for just 27 minutes. The first pilot Andrei Turcat said on his return to the
airport finally the big bird flies. And in 1863 the Battersea railway bridge
across the Thames in London was opened. And that brings us to the end of this
morning's news briefing. Farming Today is asking if you know how your bacon is
reared in just a moment but first it's time for prayer for the day with Jonathan
Thomas, pastor of Cornerstone Church in Abergavenny. Good morning. I'm on the
beach in Aberaeron, West Wales early in the morning where I've been visiting
places associated with Saint David, the Celtic Christian who once roamed these
mountains and seas as he spread the gospel from show to show. But I've been more
interested in his pace rather than his place, the monastic rhythms and rituals
that was a rule of life for him and his followers from vigils to vespers, matins
and meditations. In our age of instant internet, constant connectivity and
endless entertainment many feel a desire to slow down and step away from the
busyness of life. Perhaps there's something in these ancient ways that can help
us today. David's daily diary ensured his hands touched the earth and his body
felt the sea. Sometimes he would wade into water up to his neck, recite the
psalms and seek penance. Once when Jesus was by the sea he gave an invitation
that still stands today. Come with me by yourself to a quiet place and get some
rest. So at the invitation of Jesus and in the steps of Saint David I'm going to
go into the sea up to my neck in cold water and recite a psalm as I pray.
Creator God, you rule over the surging seas. When its waves mount up you still
them. Help us to trust in you and turn to the one who says come to me and get
some rest. Amen. Prayer for the Day was presented by Jonathan Thomas, pastor of
Cornerstone Church in Abergavenny. Now on Radio 4, Farming Today with Kaz
Graham. Good morning. Today, outdoor bread, outdoor reared, free range? Welfare
labelling on meat can all be a bit of a mystery. We hear calls to make it
compulsory but also easier to understand. First though, ongoing salad shortages
have highlighted calls for a horticulture growth strategy. The NFU has just
published its ideas on how to boost UK horticulture, a 10-point plan, and we've
been hearing from government about a possible strategy for some time. Former
farming minister George Eustice promised just that, this time last year at the
NFU conference. A lot of the opportunities are in the horticulture sector to
displace predominantly Dutch imports at the moment, and we are looking at what
it would take to develop a whole new generation of glasshouse production here in
the UK, possibly co-located with industrial processes, making use of surplus
heat and surplus carbon dioxide from industrial processes to increase our
horticultural output. We're looking at everything from planning to finance to
support the horticultural sector, and we'll be saying more about that in the
months ahead. George Eustice. The government food strategy last June committed
to developing a world-leading horticulture strategy for England. And now the
Warwick Crop Centre, part of Warwick University, has published a discussion
paper promoting the production of fresh produce in the UK. It says a 10-year
plus support plan is needed for the sector. Professor Richard Napier is one of
the authors of Growing British. There needs to be an overall strategy for
coordinating how we take forward research and innovation in the sector. There
were plans for a horticulture strategy outlined in the government's food
strategy last year. Has that ever materialised? No, I think it's a work in
progress. I mean, the House of Lords have announced a committee and they're
doing a call for evidence right now, started this week. So, I think that will be
contributing to it in the fullness of time. And why is it so important to have a
national strategy backed by government? There are so many pressures on this
industry at the moment. So, there is great room for an improvement in terms of
how it's supported and the strategy that's behind and that includes support for
investment for growers and support for the research which underpins the
innovation that's necessary as we adapt our industry towards a new and better
future. So, once there is a strategy, that's all well and good. The big barriers
to a healthy fresh produce sector that we often report on are labour shortages,
a lack of investment and inflexible contracts with supermarkets who don't pay
the cost of production to farmers. How difficult is it going to be to address
these things? Yes, they're all challenges. They're all opportunities to be
snatched if we can approach them properly. You asked earlier about the need for
the primary use of a strategy and one of those is, I think, to have a coherent
voice which can be heard to lots of different audiences to say this is where we
need to get to so that we can achieve fair price for the produce that's
produced, that there is a satisfactory long-term strategy to underpin innovation
and of course, we also need support from consumers. What are the key actions
that you feel government needs to take? That they need to set up this coherent
collegiate voice. It's quite a broad church, the horticulture sector, because
there are so many commodities which are grown under this title as well as
ornamental horticulture, of course. So, it's quite a diverse set of interests
which need to be represented and then realised. One way of doing that would be
to set up a structure that perhaps we have had in the past which was an
innovation partnership or a fresh produce innovation centre that pulled these
interests together. That's Professor Richard Napier. Now, all this week we're
looking at pigs and as I'm sure you'll have noticed in the shops, there's a
number of different labels on pork products that relate to how they're reared
and how they're housed on farms. So, start of a 10, what is the difference
between outdoor bred, outdoor reared, RSPCA assured and red tractor assured?
It's not an easy question. Even the Farming Today team found ourselves wrangling
about it. The University of Leeds runs the National Pig Centre near Tadcaster.
Staff there showed our reporter Sarah Fulkingham the various ways in which pigs
are kept. Biosecurity is very important on this farm. I'm in clean overalls,
I've showered, washed my hair and I'm in the straw unit where the pregnant sows
are kept with KT McDermott, a lecturer in sustainable livestock production. How
long are they kept here for? So, they stay in here for their pregnancy, which
for a pig is three months, three weeks, three days. The straw acts as enrichment
for them, it's a bedding. Some of them will use it for gut fill, they might eat
a little bit of it as well and they'll move into the farrowing house about a
week before they're due to give birth. These are our freedom farrowing crates.
Mum comes into this pen to give birth. The pen is around 2.4 by 2.4 metres. She
is on a slatted system with a covered creep area for the piglets, so that gives
the piglets a safe space to enter away from mum. Mum can move around the pen
freely and in our system here at the National Pig Centre, we have temporary
crate-in options as well, so we can close mum in just for a short period of time
while she farrows and then open the crate back up to give her freedom of
movement within the pen. In a traditional narrow crate, how long would the pig
be confined standing up, sitting down but not turning around? She would move
into that crate about a week before she's due to give birth and then she would
stay in that crate until her piglets are weaned, so about five weeks in total.
Do you know how much production in the country still relies on the traditional
narrow crates? I couldn't give you an exact number but I would say the majority
of farms still have the traditional crates at the moment. We've come outside now
to the outdoor unit where there are 220 sows here. Just dipped my wellies and
I'm with Dr Sophie Hazeldon, a researcher who runs industry trials here. So the
paddocks here are big, how big are they? Yeah, so they're about 15 by 15 metres.
The sows have a lot more space to roam around, the arks have straw in so they
can nest and perform sort of natural behaviours before they give birth. So
that's outdoor bred isn't it? Yes, these piglets are with their sow for four
weeks until they're weaned and sold on to other farms. And if someone saw the
logo outdoor reared, what does that mean? So outdoor reared means that the
piglets are typically with their sow for a bit longer or kept outdoors for up to
10 weeks usually. But mortality rate is higher here isn't it? Yeah, so mortality
out here can be about 15 percent, so it is a bit higher than the indoor unit for
a number of reasons. So the sows are obviously free to roam around so they are
more prone to being laid on, but also things like the extreme of the weather as
we're currently stood in can affect piglet mortality as well. Yeah, it's a cold
drizzly winter's day. It is, yeah. Which can sap the piglets. So at four weeks
when these piglets are weaned, where will they head? Typically they'd go into
indoor straw barns. So let's head back to the main farm where you have an indoor
system and that's on slatted pens just to see what the difference would be. I'm
Dr Amy Taylor, we're in the finishing unit here at the National Pig Centre. So
in this barn here we have pigs that moved in at 12 weeks of age, so around about
35 kilos. They're on a concrete slatted system. We have 10 pigs per pen. The pen
is about 2.6 by 3.5 meters. The slatted system allows the fecal material in the
urine to obviously drain into the slurry pit underneath to increase hygiene.
It's much less labour intensive than a straw pen for example for farmers and
it's pretty easy to clean once the pigs have been moved out or new pigs come in.
They've got a ball on a chain and a bit of wood as well on a chain. That's to
play with? Is that what they call enrichment? Yes, that's to meet the
requirements for enrichment. So you can see the pigs are quite interested in it.
And this would meet Red Tractor Mark Assurance scheme, wouldn't it? Yes, it
would. They're stocked at a density and they've got their enrichment that would
meet requirements for the Red Tractor. But not RSPCA? Not RSPCA. I believe they
need to be on a solid wall with straw. Obviously straw having the advantage that
they've got the rooting material. They can play around with it, they can eat it.
Disadvantages being it can be harder to clean. You need to make sure you've got
good quality straw otherwise you'll end up with dusty straw which could lead to
respiratory diseases. Pigs spend a lot of time lying down so it does provide
comfort as well for the pigs on a straw-based system. That's Sarah Falkingham
reporting from the National Pig Centre. Well, it's 18 months since DEFRA held
what's called a call for evidence on animal welfare and food labelling. This
spring they're holding a further consultation. Currently there are no legal
requirements to label products with information on how animals farmed for food
are reared with the exception of whole eggs. But DEFRA tells us that the
evidence they've gathered, and I quote, demonstrated that mandatory welfare
labelling reform can harness the market to reward farmers, empower consumers and
improve animal health and welfare. Good news then, so long as consumers actually
understand the labels. Something I put to Professor Richard Bennett, Professor
of Agricultural Economics at the University of Reading. That's the big problem
that the consumer has, is trying to unpick what different ways of production
mean for welfare. It's difficult enough for animal welfare scientists and those
in the food industry to try and understand that, but to expect the consumer to
understand it, I think is unrealistic. As consumers, we want to be assured that
the food that we eat comes from animals that have a high standard of living. We
just heard in Sarah Falkingham's report that the majority of UK farms, or indoor
farms, will still be using narrow crates for farrowing, the ones where sows
can't actually turn around. Do you think people would be surprised by that? I
think many of them would. Whenever we talk to consumers about methods of farm
production, they're normally really surprised. They just don't know. And to a
certain extent, why should they? They should be able to trust the food supply
chain to produce and sell the food that they want to the standards that they're
prepared to pay for. How much do you think the general public actually
understands from the labels that we have nowadays? I think there are very few
labels that people bother to really read. Probably only about 10 to 20% of
people actually bother to read what's on labels anyway. But also understanding
things that people in the industry think are non-technical explanations of food,
people actually often find very technical and they don't understand it. For
those that want to know about it, it's good if that information is available,
but probably not on the label, probably on a website or some other source. Would
a mandatory method of production labelling system then be an improvement? I
think in principle a mandatory animal welfare labelling system is a good idea.
And indeed, it was recommended by the Farm Animal Welfare Committee that was
about 15 years ago. In practice, I think it's an enormous challenge to come up
with a system that consumers understand and that is meaningful in relation to
the actual standards of welfare that animals experience on farm. But I think
it's a challenge that we ought to strive for. We often report on how it's more
expensive for farmers to produce pigs to higher welfare standards. Does
providing that enhanced welfare, does it really pay dividends for farmers? If
they whack that on the label, can they really sell that meat for more? I think
they can do. I think we don't know the extent of the market because we haven't
really got a system in place where consumers can choose the products with a high
welfare status. At the moment, you go in the supermarket and how do you know
what the welfare is of those animals? You just have to guess. I'm not sure we've
even got very far with this conversation in some ways because if we do have
improved welfare labelling, that's great. However, if the consumer doesn't
really understand it, does it make a difference? Well, that's where the
labelling has to be a good system. It has to have descriptions that make sense
to consumers. I think then we'll see that consumers actually are willing to pay
for higher welfare in a way that often the industry says that they're not. I
mean, we've seen this with eggs. As soon as there was a clearer labelling system
for eggs, we saw quite an increase in the purchase of free-range eggs compared
with other eggs. Professor Richard Bennett from the University of Reading. And
that's it from us for this morning. I'm Kaz Graham. The studio manager is Tim
Allen and the producer in Bristol is Rebecca Rooney. And now, Tweet of the Day.
The RSPB volunteer Steve Vickers recalls childhood memories of the Ida. When I
first started bird watching many, many years ago at the Teesmouth Bird Club, the
duck I always liked very much was the Ida duck. I'm from the northeast, so this
is the duck which has always been there while I've grown up. He's always been
there. And of course, when I go now to see my parents, we always go over onto
the headland where I spent my teenage years bird watching. And the ducks are
always there in the rocks, sunbathing. And if you listen carefully, you can
always hear them because they have the most amazing vocabulary. Why do I like
them more? Well, I suppose it's a bird which is synonymous with the northeast.
And it's interesting that in the year 676, one of the first bird protection laws
was passed by St. Cuthbert, who lived on the Farne Islands. And of course, it
was to protect the Ida duck. They're known locally as Cuddy ducks, because of
course, Cuddy is short for Cuthbert. St. Cuthbert Cuddy ducks.