TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Every watch if you're looking for the gold it's all around you the gold watch
on BBC iPlayer BBC News at 10 o'clock Police in Northern Ireland say the
dissident Republican group the new IRA is the focus of their Investigation into
the shooting of a police officer in County Terrone last night Detective chief
inspector John Caldwell is in a critical condition in hospital after being
attacked at a sports complex in Oma Assistant chief constable Mark McEwan said
people ran in all directions as the shots were fired Why John was putting
footballs into the boot of his car and accompanied by his young son? To gun man
approached and we believe both have fired multiple shots John has run a short
distance and he's fallen to the ground and I read on the ground the gun men have
continued to fire at him That's you the absolute callous nature of this attack
in a crowded space There's been a cautious welcome by football clubs to plans
announced by the government to establish the first Independent regulator of
men's football in England the body will have powers to impose financial
settlements Meaning it could force the Premier League to share more money with
the lower divisions if an agreement can't be reached between the leagues The
labor leader secure starmie is launching what he calls five national missions
Outlining his plans for the UK if his party wins the next general election The
commitments will include securing the highest economic growth in the g7. They'll
be announced during a speech in Manchester shortly Doctors at a hospital in
London have published guidance on how to treat the severe side effects of
inhaling nitrous oxide After a surgeon people admitted with symptoms over the
past year They're warning that heavy use of laughing gas as it's known can cause
permanent damage to nerves The death has been announced of the football
commentator John Matson. He was 77 Matson began his career with the BBC in 1971
He oversaw more than 2,000 games on radio and television before retiring in 2017
BBC News Now on Radio 4 it's time for woman's hour with Haley Hassell Good
morning and welcome to the program We have got some exciting interviews and
guests coming up on the show for you this morning Shortly, I'll be talking to
Avril Mansfield who made history as the UK's first female vascular surgeon She
was often met with disbelief and what would today be called misogynistic
comments But her amazing achievements have stood out for themselves and I'll be
talking to her very shortly I'll also be joined by Dada Masilo as she talks
about her new ballet called sacrifice It's an empowering display of female power
dance and nature It's got some rhythm and style that you probably have never
come across before So make sure you stay tuned and with us for that And we have
some new research from the Cambridge Centre of Family Research Which has
surveyed children over lockdowns from around the world and found that children
with older siblings have fared best Whilst only children have suffered more, but
I'd love to know if you can relate to this Perhaps you have siblings and feel
they've supported you and protected you in your life in some way Have they been
your linchpin during the pandemic? Well, maybe you wish you didn't have siblings
and envy those only children who get to do more of the things they want their
way Well, I'd love to hear your thoughts on this one Please do get in touch
Women's Hour is of course all about you and your involvement in our discussion
So please let me know your thoughts on this one. You can text the programme The
number is 84844 text will be charged at your standard message rate on social
media We're at BBC Women's Hour and you can email us through our website too
Many of you have already been responding with me on this from Instagram Calma
says my sister is 16 months younger than me and we are very protective of each
other The same amount which is a lot And another says my brother became my
father when things weren't going well at home Well, please keep those comments
in it's great to get an insight into your lives And you can now also send a
WhatsApp message or a voice note using the number 03700 100444 It would be great
to hear your voice with those and data charges may apply depending on your
provider So you might want to use Wi-Fi if you can Terms and conditions can be
found on our website But first this morning you may have seen the news headlines
that a new app to block child abuse images has received £1.8m of EU funding with
the aim to help combat what has been described as a growing demand for child
abuse images Now according to the NSPCC, child abuse image offences have reached
record levels with more than 30,000 reported in the last year This represents a
66% increase in child abuse images and offences recorded by UK Police Police in
the last 5 years Well their new report has also revealed that the police have
recorded the first child abuse crimes in the metaverse with 8 instances recorded
last year Well to discuss this further I'm joined by Rani Gavinder, Senior Child
Safety Online Policy Officer from the NSPCC and John Stains, former police
officer from East Safety Training who now goes into schools to educate children
and teens about online safety Welcome to the show both of you, Rani I'm going to
start with you please because I know children are in constant conversation with
you through Childline and your own reporting systems So do these figures
surprise you at all? No unfortunately at the NSPCC these figures don't surprise
us as much as they are incredibly concerning As you mentioned we hear through
Childline and children that we work with that child abuse image crimes are
unfortunately pervasive on social media now We get calls for example to
Childline from children that are really worried about these kinds of images
which they know have been shared about them online and don't know who to talk to
and how these can be tackled or taken down, it's extremely worrying though that
there has been such an increase over the last five years It's an issue we've
been highlighting for some time and does indicate that tech companies need to be
doing much more proactively to tackle these crimes online Why is there that
increase? Can you, if you've got any idea what is behind the surge in these
child abuse images? There are a couple of reasons why we might be seeing this
increase One reason is that in the pandemic we saw the online world become a
really integral part of all our lives That was the case for children but
unfortunately offenders exploited that and found new ways to abuse and offend
children online based on that increased use of the internet and that has really
been a structural change which has continued since the pandemic and might be a
reason why these crimes have continued to go up But again another reason is that
technology is evolving, there are increasingly new and complex ways that you can
communicate and share images online and this has happened at a really rapid pace
and we haven't seen enough action from the tech firms to think about what the
risks of these changes might be to children and how they can help prevent those
Yeah, I just want to go back to what you were saying about the increase in
children contacting you and what they're saying so that we can fully understand
this What are children saying to you? What are the sort of things they're
talking to you about? So one example for example that we get through from
children is when they have perhaps consensually shared an image with someone
else but then this has been shared with others perhaps in their schools or with
the people that they know and they're really worried because that's people that
they know that are seeing this But then a different case is when children have
been groomed online by adults and typically male offenders and they have shared
these images because they've essentially been blackmailed into doing it and then
they ring because they have no idea really who this person is or what's
happening with those photos So there are different ways that this abuse can play
out but the clear running theme is that there needs to be more done and much
more support in place for children as well as design features that can
proactively tackle this harm And sooner as well, it shouldn't be getting to the
point that the ringing child line, it should be before that that children are
able to notify this or it should be prevented before it even gets to the child
itself Yeah, absolutely. We would really call for prevention being the solution
here. It can't be allowed that in five years time we're still seeing an increase
in these cases We know that there are steps that tech platforms can take to
change the way that children are interacted with online so that we can help
really bring down these cases But also as you say, if these instances do occur,
there must be the reporting tools in place and children must be signposted to
the right support so that they know they aren't alone when these crimes do
happen Yeah, you talk about the online space there and I know your report shows
that these perpetrators have moved on to the metaverse Can you explain to us
what that metaverse is and how children are being approached and groomed there?
Absolutely. So the metaverse is essentially a virtual world. A lot of people, if
they have used it, might have put on headsets and it takes you into a virtual
alternate reality where you can communicate with other people who are also
wearing these headsets and are in these new spaces and this might be in a
virtual cafe or park or you might be able to play games with people This is, as
you say, a new and emerging threat so we don't know exactly how these crimes
have been taken place What's clear is that offenders will find ways that they
can exploit this new and evolving technology, particularly ones like the
metaverse where it really does make you feel like you are meeting these people
and that you know them When in fact they might be complete strangers and you've
never spoken to them before and this for children can make them particularly
vulnerable so that's why we are concerned that we're seeing there are first
reports of these crimes It shows that at meta, for example, who have this
platform and are rolling out these tools, they need to make sure children's
safety is an absolute priority when they're designing them because otherwise it
will be exploited and used by offenders Right, yeah, I'm going to bring in John
on that now because obviously, John, you go into schools to talk to children
about the dangers. What do they tell you? What are their experiences in this in
this online world, this metaverse? It's one of them areas. Good morning, by the
way, but the metaverse hasn't really come big in our world at this time. So it
is there and people are using it but because like, as just explained, you do
need headsets, you do need more equipment to use it. We're finding more grooming
is actually taking place on the front end of the internet, just in normal games
rather than offline. I mean, this reminds me of many, many years ago when I was
working in the field of the online protection world and we had a thing called
Second Life. And that was a virtual world as well wasn't 3D as the metaverses
because it is an evolution of the internet to make it all 3D and more immersive
but Second Life was exactly the same thing and there was areas in Second Life
where perpetrators would go to groom children. These platforms have been there
but they're more specialized, I think, than the front end. Our biggest problem,
like you just heard with the increase in imagery, is really on the front end of
gaming and on the front end of the open internet really and I think that's the
problem. Sometimes, even when we talk to parents and professionals, we're still
very hooked up on the dark web, the, you know, the underbelly of the badness and
all the rest of it where this stuff has really moved into the front end of the
internet and it's under our noses, but that's why we're not seeing it. How do
the perpetrators target children on these various platforms? Well, we've come up
with basically a three step approach and it's not a scientific one, it's what
we've seen over the years working in the field when we're in the police and now
the children tell us the same way. First thing is three steps. First one, you
have to get a child to like you, which is common sense, so that can be done in
three ways. One, you give the child something. Now again, in a game, it's very
easy to go down to your local supermarket, buy a scratch card with the amount on
like PlayStation card or anything really, give the child the code, they load
that to their account, they've got money to spend in the game. Secondly, you can
trade in a game so you can buy a super cool item in a game where it's from FIFA
right up to Roblox, you buy something, you trade that with a child, again,
you're their best friend. Or thirdly, the one that's the main one is the actual,
what we're finding is emotional support and that is horrendous because the child
has perhaps a bad home life or is upset or got pressures of score could be
anything and if this could be from any age really, we took primary and
secondary. They go home at night, log on to their game and then someone in the
game says, how are you today? And that's the first person that's been nice to
them. So they go, well, oh, thanks for asking and they start talking that
emotional support. And when you talk to children, you say, does it matter how
old that person is? They'll say no. So that's your first step. Second step is to
get them out of the game, which sounds bizarre. So because again, if you rely on
tech companies and a lot of them will do this, they're like, they'll put age 13,
you can't chat if you're under 13. So that doesn't help. You can't send pictures
in a lot of games. That doesn't help a bad person at all. So they want to get
them out onto a third party app. And that could be anything from FaceTime to
kick messenger to Discord could be anything. But that's the second stage. Get
them out of the game onto a third party app. So for example, if you was playing
Fortnite, but you've moved the chat onto to a say a Discord server, your parents
would see you sitting there. You'd have a headset on. You'd have the game on the
telly. You're talking away. Parents would quietly think you're talking to a
friend at school when you're actually talking to the bad person. And then the
last step is to get you to send a picture. Now, that won't be a indecent picture
won't be a rude picture. They'll be just a picture from the game. And this was
one we had recently a 10 year old girl sent her a picture of her pets in her
game to this person that she thought was another 10 year old. They did what
we've shown many children what to do, how to geolocate a picture as in work out
where it was taken because of the second in a device it was taken on. They
geolocate it went back to her and he sounds really horrible. I do apologize. If
you don't send us a naked picture yourself, we're going to murder your parents.
She had a choice. Go to her parents say, Mom, Dad, I've been threatened or send
a picture. 80% of children we talked to from year three up to once you get to
secondary, they'll all do it because the art of this is I can't tell my parents
because I've broken one of the rules. I've talked to a stranger in a game. So
I'll send a picture. And then you've got them. And that is simple as that. It
does seem incredibly simple and quite quick for these strangers to get hold of
information from these children. But you make a good point that they don't want
to tell the parents because they don't want to get in trouble. And perhaps
there's many of these online spaces that parents don't understand as much as the
children do you do? Do you think there's a naivety as far as parents are
concerned? Oh, yeah, I mean, there is. It's a lack of awareness and education
from the parents point of view. And I understand as parents, everyone is busy,
everyone is doing everything. And unlike our younger people, we've got hours and
hours to spend looking at stuff. But we use two simple analogies as a training
company to parents. We say two things. One, we call the internet the internet
express. And we say it's a train that's on a journey and no one knows where it's
going. But the child jumps on that train and goes on the journey of a lifetime
and gets on every stop they can. So whether that would be TikTok, Snapchat,
Instagram, social media, gaming could be anywhere. They're going to get off
every stop and explore it. As a parent, you got a choice. Get on the train with
them or wave them off at a station. Unfortunately, most parents are at the
station waving them off and hopefully they get where they are with no stranger
danger messages, no education in it. So it's a bit like saying, you know, as
parents, we invest a lot of time in our children in unfortunately, I hate this,
what we call the real world. So if you're teaching your child to swim, you
wouldn't just walk up to the swimming pool for me and say, off you go. You get
in the water with me get on bands you give them lessons you do the whole lot on
the internet. Off you go. For example, hobbies. And the big one we talk about
with hobbies and things like that in life, we say to him like, if your child
does any hobby, I can guarantee his parents and we've all been there. If you're
listening as a parent where you rush home, you rush dinner, you get them to the
club, you get back Saturday morning, you're up at eight o'clock to go down the
field. You've all done that. We spend time on the internet. We don't. We just
ignore it. We often just sit with them for a half 20 minutes once a week. Play
the game, look at the commodities, look at the dangers, give them the stranger
danger message in that game, what the bad people are going to do and how they
can look and open the door to communication. Then we will crack this world. So
get on there with them. I may not understand what my kids are playing online,
but it's about time I did and get on there and understand it just like you would
go into the park. But John, I've been with you when you've been to schools and
we visited children and asked them lots of questions about safety online. And
one of the things I was struck by was when we went into a primary school and I'd
say about 80% of the children said they'd been asked for pictures online. So did
the statistics coming out today, do they surprise you at all? Or have you been
expecting this for a long time? No, we sounds really horrible. Again, we said at
the start of the pandemic back in 2020, when we closed and we was in schools at
the time, right up until the Friday. Everything shut. We said like this is going
to be a complete nightmare because all right, everyone's being furloughed,
everyone's being sent home. Also, so are the perpetrators. They're all going to
be at home. So the ones that and it sounds horrible because some of these people
work. There's some of these are I want you to use the word normal people, but
they've got normal lives and such. They're not just sitting there all day trying
to groom children. And that's something they do on top. But they had lots and
lots of time on their hands when the pandemic hit. So we knew this would
explode. And when you look at some of the figures, even from the NSPCC or even
the Internet Watch Foundation, a thousand percent increase, thousand percent
worse since lockdown. Thank you, John. And Rani, just back to you for a moment,
because I know you found that police are taking notice of this online world.
There have been criminal charges, but is it being taken seriously enough? What
are you asking to happen that will better protect children from this?
Absolutely. It's really important that the police are collecting this data so we
can understand where these harms are emerging from and make sure action has been
taken to tackle that. But we do have the online safety bill, which is going
through parliament at the moment. That's a really important child protection
measure because that's going to make sure that companies have to take steps to
tackle illegal threats such as child sexual abuse on their platforms. So the
NSPCC, a step we'd like the government to take is to introduce a user advocacy
body for children in that bill because children really do need a champion in
this new regulatory world. We can see with the increase in these kinds of crimes
that children at the minute are too vulnerable and being left to carry the
burden, essentially, for the failure of tech companies to protect them properly.
So we want to see the government commit to having a body that can represent
children, that can listen to them, understand new harms that are coming through,
for example, on the metaverse, and make sure that tech companies finally take
the steps to prioritize children's safety on their platforms. And I understand
that there are reporting out there. There are ways to report this. You can go to
Childline, of course, or the NSPCC. But my big concern is, is that not too late?
Children have already seen these images by then. They've already shared those
images by then. They've already been abused in some way. Are we not behind the
wheel in this? I think at this stage we are. Yeah, it is prevention is
absolutely the most important approach to take care. And no child should ever
have to go through this experience and then the reporting system afterwards. So
we do need that approach that focuses on prevention, taking proactive steps to
look at new features that are on platforms like live streaming, like being able
to connect with strangers, and think about the risks that might pose to them. So
that we can upfront be tackling these and really bring these figures down over
coming years. Thank you, Rani. And thank you, John. Rani Givinder is a senior
child safety officer policy from the NSPCC. And John Staines, former police
officer, now runs eSafety Training in School. Well, the meta have produced a
statement that says this horrific content is banned in our apps. And we report
instances of child sexual exploitation to the National Centre for Missing and
Exploited Children. We lead the industry in the development and use of
technology to prevent and remove this content. And we work with the police,
child safety experts and industry partners to tackle this societal issue. Our
work in this area is never done and we'll continue to do everything we can to
keep this content on our apps. Well, do please keep your comments coming in on
this issue. I know lots of people will have children or young people they know
who are online a lot. I'm sure many of you have come across this. Please get in
touch with the competition as we go along. Now, my next guest has made waves in
the medical world and has done so more often than not as the only woman surgeon
in the hospital. Avril Mansfield qualified as a surgeon in the early 1970s, a
time when women medics were outnumbered by men eight to one. Back then, a woman
saying that she was a surgeon was met with surprise, disbelief and sometimes
amusement. Nonetheless, Avril rose through the ranks and went on to become the
UK's first female vascular surgeon and first female professor of surgery. Now,
age 85, Avril has written her memoir, Life in Her Hands, and joins me now.
Avril, thank you so much for coming on Woman's Hour. Thank you very much for
having me. Now, I've read your book and it's something I've got to admit I
wouldn't normally read. I'm a classic 19th century literature girl myself, but I
was enthralled not just because we're from the same town of Blackpool, but
mostly because you bring to the medical world of surgery a sort of humble
natural heroism that often made my jaw drop. And I wanted to turn the page
wondering what on earth I've been doing with my life because you've achieved so
much from such an early age. You were the first female vascular surgeon in the
UK. You were the first female to be honored by the American College of Surgeons.
You became the first woman to be a professor of surgery and you set up an
initiative called Women in Surgical Training to encourage more women to take up
the profession. I mean, I could go on, but can you tell me what we all want to
know? Why did you do it? Why did you choose to go into surgery in the first
place? It's a good question and I don't have a very clear answer to that. I
started to read books when I was about eight or nine about medicine and
particularly about surgery and the history of surgery. And I was fascinated by
the fact that people were exploring operations without them knowing whether they
could work or even if people could survive. Perhaps, for example, having their
chest opened, somebody had to do it first. And as a small child, I was
captivated by that and I wanted to go along in that direction. I was used to
seeing women doctors. Surprisingly, my school doctor was female. The person who
delivered me into the world was female. So women doctors were not a rarity for
me. So it seemed perfectly reasonable that I should think I could go along in
that direction in my future career. And talking about how you came into this
world, I was fascinated to read that your first interest into medical research
was when you learnt about your own quite traumatic birth for your mother and how
there was no real understanding of your mother's complications. Did that map
your interest into surgery? It certainly mapped a specialty interest in my
future career because she got a deep vein thrombosis and a massive pulmonary
embolism, which very nearly killed her. And I was completely perplexed by this
and fascinated by why it should happen. And a lot of my research was about why
that should happen and how we can prevent it from happening. It was much less
frequent now than it used to be. But in those days it was often fairly lethal.
And I'm sure your family are very proud about that. But I believe you were in
the local paper when you were a child and you said you wanted to be a surgeon,
but they printed that you wanted to be a nurse. Why was that? Was that just
because it was seen as inappropriate or unlikely that girls could be doctors?
No, it was my mother. My mother thought it was above my station to say I wanted
to be a doctor. Certainly not a surgeon, but certainly just to say you want to
be a doctor. You can't say that. You can say you want to be a nurse if you must.
And I have nothing against nurses at all. I love nurses. But I wanted to be a
doctor and I wanted to make that quite plain. So I was really very cross about
that. But yes, indeed, they did publish that. See, I always imagine it's the
person at the top is keeping you down. But in a way, it can sometimes be people
close to home that are too scared to push those boundaries when you yourself
wanted to. Yes. I mean, my parents had not had the benefit of higher education.
They both had to leave school at 13 or 14. They were intelligent people. They
could have done much, much more. And I was the one with the opportunities and I
was the fortunate one. Well, when you were a child living in Blackpool, there
was no NHS, of course. And I read with fascination you describing your father
coming home with his wages and putting money in a pot on the mantelpiece for the
doctor. Yes. So becoming ill or being in an accident must have been quite a
worry then. What was life like for you before the NHS? It was extremely
difficult and it is really a very strong memory when the NHS came into existence
and that pot on the mantelpiece could be removed. Things like my mother
requiring surgery to correct for the damage that had been done when I was born
put a huge strain on family resources. It had to be paid for. It wasn't it
wasn't going to come free. So I saw that that weight of responsibility that came
from quite a small income. My father was on a relatively small wage as a welder,
which is what his job was. So to see that change, to think that everybody could
be treated properly and when they needed it was a wonderful step forward, even
for a child of eight or nine or whatever age I was at the time. It was very
clear that this was a momentous moment. That moment when the NHS was created,
and I think you were 11 at the time, how important was that to you and how
important do you still hold dear the NHS? It's been absolutely central in the
whole of my life. I've wanted to see the NHS thrive and prosper. And it has been
such a wonderful thing that people can have health care as and when they need it
without having to count the cost. So, yes, it has been a really important part
of my life. But I do wonder how you look on the medical students of today
because, for instance, you talk about current students not being able to perform
minor operations until much later in their study in their career. But how much
do you think today's teachings have changed from when you were there and is that
positive or negative in some ways? In some respects, it's changed. But in truth,
the medical students are just the same. They're wonderful young people who
really do want to be looking after patients, doing the best for patients. They
are all like that. And we need to foster that in our young students. We need to
encourage that because that's really what we all want when we're sick. And it's
somebody who wants to care for us and to give off their best to us. And most
students do. Clearly the fact that they can't do some procedures when their
students, which I was allowed to do, is just the way of life. It's pushed things
back a little bit. And I sometimes am concerned that people don't discover
whether they really have aptitude for something like surgery, which is, after
all, a skill. They may not learn that at an early age. They may have to wait a
bit before they can discover whether that really is the future career for them
because of pushing it back to a slightly older age. Yeah. You going into that
world as a surgeon and then as a consultant as well, it was a male dominated
environment and you were often overlooked. You were called a slip of a thing and
someone presumed that you were just taking someone's history and the doctor was
on their way. Were you overlooked and how difficult was it in that environment
for you? Well, you would write in a way that people would be surprised and
almost reluctant to believe that you could be that person with that amount of
responsibility. It sometimes worked in the opposite direction, of course,
because once they discovered that in fact you were that person with that
responsibility, then suddenly it seemed as though you must be something extra
special. So being female was not without its advantages. You stood out from the
crowd. You weren't one of a huge crowd of men. You were the odd female. So there
were some benefits from being the occasional woman. And I believe when you told
your senior surgeon that you planned to get married, he said, what a pity,
thought you had such a promising career ahead of you. He did, I was really
disappointed by that because he was a great supporter. He was the senior
consultant and clearly, from a different era, not used to having women who
wanted to pursue a career in surgery. And he saw it as something that you had to
be totally dedicated to. And there wouldn't be room in your life for anything
else. But I proved that that was not the case. You could do both. You did. And
then you went on to set up the Women in Surgery Initiative. What have you done
for women beyond just succeeding yourself? You've helped so many generations
after you as well. My hope is that what we did with that Women in Surgical
Training Scheme at the college was to make them aware of the fact that it's
perfectly feasible, perfectly possible, and indeed desirable for women to pursue
a career in surgery. There's nothing odd about it. There's nothing wrong with
it. And it is, of course, an extremely fulfilling career. And a lot of women
have said, you can't be what you can't see. And so making it more visible, I
think was really very important. And the other aspect of it was that we were, at
that stage, only 2% of surgeons were female. And we were approaching about 50%
of medical students were female. So the sums just didn't add up. We needed to
encourage some of those women going into medicine to believe that it was
perfectly okay to become a surgeon if that's what you wanted to do. I've said
all my life that what's most important is that you actually take a good close
look at the career of surgery because you're gonna be stuck with it for the next
30 years. And it is quite a demanding job, as you can imagine, and a wonderful
one. Don't get me wrong, I loved it. I loved every minute of it. But you do have
to make sure that that is what you want to do. So I encourage young women to
explore it and enjoy it. Yeah, bringing us to that, that current generation,
many of the papers are inundated with stories of the NHS strikes at the moment.
Now you said to yourself that you were in this to help people. Altruism was the
core of being a doctor for you. You wouldn't walk away from anything. So with
that in mind, I'd love to know your opinions on the recent strikes in the NHS.
How do you feel about doctors going on strike? It's often criticized as leaving
vulnerable patients without care. Isn't that a difficult question? I kind of
guessed you would ask me about this strike. This is one. We need to push the
strike. Because it's topical. But something I know that I could not have done, I
couldn't have walked away. I never could. And sometimes I would actually
dedicate myself to a patient when perhaps I should have been dedicating myself
to some other issue in the family or at home. Because they were paramount. The
patient was always the paramount concern as far as I was concerned. I understand
and sympathize with the situation that the medical profession is in. I want the
health service to succeed. I want it to be successful. I want it to engage with
the young people who are working in it so that they are content to stay in it
and are properly paid to do what they're doing in it. Because they do work hard,
extremely hard. But it's just, for me, it would have been extremely difficult to
walk away from a patient. I'm sure it's difficult for them too. I don't think
any of them actually want to neglect their patients. They just need to give a
message to someone and that's the way they're finding to do it. You're right.
And it is a difficult subject, especially in your position. But I do want to
also reflect on your life works. Lots of people are getting in touch with the
programme who are huge admirers of yourself. I want to read a few of them out to
you. Fiona says, I remember from my days as a nurse in Liverpool in the late
1970s the huge respect we had for Ms Mansfield. She was one of, if not the only,
female consultant and everyone held her in high esteem. It's great to hear from
her today. And Dr. Sarah Pape, who's a consultant burns and plastic surgeon,
says we have never met. But Ms Mansfield was well known for her wise words,
which I have learned them from those who did have the honour of working with
her. I qualified as a doctor in 1982 when it was still difficult to be taken
seriously as a female surgeon. But thanks to the pioneering work of a very small
number of women like Ms Mansfield, who went before me, it was not impossible.
She will never know how much I owe to her. That's lovely. Thank you for coming
on the show. You've obviously helped many women and it's been lovely to have
you. I don't know what you're going to do next. You've got so many awards.
You've achieved so much. You've even met the Queen. What is next for you, Avril?
Well, I took up the cello in retirement. So that's really the thing I need to
concentrate on is getting better at playing my cello, which I love. Like you do.
Honestly, you're unstoppable. But it's been so lovely to have you. Thank you
very much. Thank you very much indeed. Avril Mansfield. Now, lots of you are
also getting in touch with the show about your older siblings. We're talking
about this because Cambridge Centre of Family Research has found out that during
the pandemic, many children were affected and went through difficult times. But
those with older siblings came off a little better. We've shared history with
our siblings that can be really valuable when going through a crisis. And
according to this study, the older sibling can help keep younger children well-
adjusted. Well, Professor Claire Hughes for the Cambridge Centre of Family
Research joins me to discuss the adverse effects of restrictions during the
pandemic on younger children and why sibling relationships are so important.
Hello, Claire, lovely to have you on the programme. Thank you very much. It's
lovely to be here. Now, the survey, it surveyed thousands of children from six
different countries, I believe, all of which had very different attitudes
towards lockdown. But tell me more about the study, why you did it, and what you
were hoping to find. Of course. Yeah, so we're at the Centre for Family
Research. So when the pandemic happened, it was obviously a question on our
minds was, how is all this going to make a difference to families? It's going to
be terribly difficult. We didn't know at that time how long it was going to go
on for. But it was clear that the experiences were likely to be different in
different countries. So Italy was a little bit stricter than we were. And I have
colleagues in Italy. So the idea just came joining in with others like me who
are interested so that we could get a little bit of extra power because we're
exploring it in different countries. So one of the countries was Sweden, for
example, where they didn't have mass school closures at home. And it turns out
that those children, they were affected by the pandemic. They didn't emerge
unscathed. But they were doing better than the children in the other countries.
So that was one of the reasons for having the international design. The idea for
looking at siblings actually came from one of my collaborators who in Italy was
stuck alone with her one child thinking life would be so much easier for him if
he had a playmate. And thinking about it, siblings don't get an awful lot of
research attention. When they do and when people think about siblings, it's
often in quite a negative way. So recently, we've heard an awful lot about
sibling rivalry. That's something that gets a lot of air time. But parents are
also worried when they have a second child that they're not going to be able to
give their second child the same kind of attention and time that they might take
within their first child. And they're quite right. They probably won't be able
to. But what these findings are indicating is that that doesn't matter because
that's more than offset in terms of children's behavioral and emotional
adjustment. That's more than offset by what the younger child gets from their
older sibling. Now, we don't exactly know what the mechanisms are. It could be
that the child themselves acts as a secure base, that they're acting as a little
caregiver, particularly during the pandemic. They may have been acting as a
playmate. They may have been helping the child with their schoolwork or
whatever. So they may have been stepping in as a little parent. It may also be
that there's a learning from experience effect that by the time you have your
second child, that you as a parent are more skilled. So it's a little bit more
indirect, the effect that the first child is blazing a trail and parents are
making whatever mistakes they make with that first child. And they're getting it
a little bit more in tune with the second child. So it could be not the child
themselves, but how the family has changed and how the parents changed. We don't
really understand the mechanism. But I think it's really important, given that
there is such a lot of negative coverage about siblings, to remember that
siblings can be really powerful sources of support and that you're not in it
alone as a parent, that the older children are actually playing their roles in
terms of looking after little ones. It's really interesting that you find it is
beneficial to have older siblings. But is it any way beneficial for the older
sibling to have a younger brother or sister? Or is that just a pain? So in the
pandemic, we were looking at three to seven year olds, and we asked whether they
had an older sibling or a younger sibling. And at that age range, if they had a
younger sibling, there was a smaller negative effect, which we think is to do
with just how busy the parents were caring for children that they weren't
perhaps able to make as much time as they would do for their older child. So
that's kind of interesting, isn't it? The parents might worry that the second
child isn't getting what they gave the first, but maybe it's what you're used
to. And if the first child is used to a lot, and then suddenly they're having to
lose some of that parental time because their parents are busy looking after
their baby sibling, then that could affect their emotional or behavioral
adjustment. So there was an effect that was slightly negative. But these things
play out over time. One of the really important things about the sibling
relationship is that it is the most enduring of all close relationships. It goes
on throughout the lifespan, and it changes. It becomes more egalitarian as the
younger child grows up and becomes more of an equal sparring partner,
conversational partner, whatever. So even if things are a little bit more
difficult in the early days, that doesn't mean it's always going to be more
difficult. Which is what our listeners are saying actually right now. They're
texting, emailing, WhatsApping us. Debbie says, my little sister is nine years
younger than me. I am 62. After the death of our wonderful mum, who my sister
lived next to all two, and I spoke to every single day of my adult life, we have
made that our new default. We talk every morning on FaceTime whilst munching on
our bowls of cereal. This closeness has been a wonderful part of our lives and a
big shout out to all siblings. Another one in here from Maureen. I have a twin
sister who contacted me every day in COVID. She would walk with me and eat meals
in her garden. She is the other half of my identity. We are part of the twins UK
study and 60 years old in a few weeks. I would have faulted with her in every
way. Another one here, my sisters are my absolute best friends. I'm the middle
of three girls and love being both a younger and an older sister. Without my
sisters, I wouldn't be the person I am now. I'm eternally grateful for them. But
I think if I can Claire, because it's not as clean cut as always the older
child, has a more tricky time, the younger child benefits from that. Because for
instance, if children were from a disruptive or unhappy home, they're going to
be affected by that division and perhaps it might not fare well. Did your study
go into the different situations that siblings are at home and how that can
affect them? We did find that of course that effect doesn't, so the other, one
of the other really interesting things about sibling relationships is that
they're not just longer lasting than any others, but they're also more diverse.
That if you know that somebody is your friend, then you know something about the
quality of that relationship. If you know that somebody is your sibling, it
could be wonderful. It could be horrendous at home. So you do get the kind of
chalk and cheese all the way through to peas in a pod. And it's really
heartwarming to hear the positive stories. I think that's very important. But we
know that sibling violence is the most common form of violence in the home. So
it can be really a source of stress if that sibling relationship isn't going
well. And we did have some measures about sibling conflict. And of course, where
there was conflict in the sibling relationship, that buffering effect wasn't
there. So it is taking the assumption that you've got a supportive functional
relationship. And in that case, having an older sibling would be best. But of
course, you wouldn't want to be making generalizations to any one particular
family because the relationships can be so different from family to family. And
of course, in Jorian lockdown, you're stuck with each other, aren't you? And of
course you can't choose your siblings. So how does that affect the dynamic of
the sibling relationships, the different personalities that are in that home?
That's a really, really good point. So siblings have been described as having a
love-hate quality that historically psychoanalysts like Freud would have put
down to that whole sibling rivalry that you're competing for parental attention.
That's why you kind of love and hate. I think it's much more likely that you've
got that love-hate relationship simply because it's an involuntary relationship.
Your sib is your sib, no matter how badly you treat them, they're there. Whereas
you will lose your friend if you don't treat them well. And so you have a kind
of license to be who you are with your sibling. And usually that means that you
can get a really lovely intimacy. That means that those relationships are so
special as you've been hearing from your listeners. But it does also mean that
Jorian can show complete rage at a sibling in a way that they wouldn't with a
friend. And so it's one of that involuntary nature of the relationship is one of
the reasons why it is so diverse. Let's talk about only children for a moment
because if they have been affected more negatively by lockdown, is there
anything we can do? Do we know the full effects of how that's going to affect
them in later life or are we just waiting to find that out? So we know from the
China one child policy that the notion of an only child syndrome doesn't really
have any evidence base at all. So overall, only children do just fine. But I
think oftentimes they do fine because the parents compensate, the parents find
ways of making sure that they're seeing their cousins or that they're having
friends over for play dates. You don't have to have a sibling, but children do
need other children in their lives. So you can find other ways of doing that. In
fact, just this weekend at my college, Newnham College that funded this study,
we had an event to bring families together to do some shared capitol play. It's
just a building thing. And it was to compensate, if you like, for the way in
which the pandemic has taken away those opportunities for families to reach out
and engage socially and for children to spend time together. So of course there
are ways that we can do that. And as working parents, I went through lockdown
with a six-year-old and a three-year-old. So it's very relevant to your study.
And both me and my husband had to work through it at the same time. It's
inevitable that you have to leave them to their own devices and they also are
stuck with each other 24 hours a day. Is there, hopefully we won't be in that
situation again, but as a parent, is there anything we can do to help that
relationship be more fruitful? So yes, to some extent, the fact that they are
unsupervised, that might be seen as a risk, but it is also an opportunity. It
does allow children to kind of grow and to take on responsibility in a way that
they wouldn't necessarily, if the parents were there in the room kind of looking
after them all the time. But in terms of sibling conflict, I think that the two
mistakes that parents typically make is either they just say, sort it out
yourselves, I don't want to know, and maybe the children don't actually have the
cognitive maturity to do that, or they jump in as a referee, typically telling
the oldest one, you're the oldest, you should know better, set a good example,
without necessarily knowing. So the advice I would normally give is to imagine
more that, say you're a mediator and you've got a couple who want to get
divorced, as the mediator, your job is not to decide who's right, who's wrong,
but it's to get them to listen to each other, it's to get them to talk about
their problem kind of constructively, and come to a resolution together. So you
set the ground rules for how they can resolve that disagreement, but it's not
you in charge of deciding who's right or who's wrong. Well, I'll try that one
when I get home, Claire. I'm not sure how it'll go, but I'll give it a go. Now,
I know we don't know the full effects of what lockdown has had on children, but
how can the results from your study be used in the future, or what do you hope
it will be used for? So I was thinking about this earlier and the way in which,
yes, let's hope it's a very long time before we're in that sort of pandemic
situation again, but to some extent, we're in another pandemic with the cost of
living crisis. That is equally sort of unexplained and uncontrollable for
parents. So parents can be under a lot of stress in the same way as they were
under stress in the first lockdown. And one of our measures we included was the
stringency of what was going on, the differences between the countries, but also
the way it changes over time. And we were finding that children were being
affected by that as much as by the family stress within the home. And so I think
as a society, we really need to be careful about how we message these things
going across. So we have another paper coming out which showed that the children
were less prosocial as well as showing more problem behaviors and that that was
explained by their kind of distress around the social distancing rules, that
they were getting upset and anxious about the fact that they couldn't go near
people or they had to keep washing their hands or whatever. So it's really
important that children are getting the message they need to get, but the way we
communicate that message isn't something that kind of causes them additional
anxiety at home. So the messaging, I think, is something that we can all work
on. Claire, this is something that has got our listeners so excited. We're
having so many messages coming through at the moment and a bit of fan mail as
well. This one says, my big sister Rachel was actually one of Professor Claire
who's his former students and she's one of the best people I know. She has
supported me at every turn from teaching me my eight times tables as a kid to
taking me to my first gigs as a teenager to driving me around to our holidays
together as an adult. She is one of the most compassionate, clever and funny
people I know and I aspire to be even half as good as her. Thank you, Rachel,
for being my sister. Now, I don't know the sister's name and I don't know how
much that was down to you, but I think you should take the credit there,
definitely. This one in says, my sister is 10 years older than me. My brother is
seven years older. They have been my great guides and protectors, now wonderful
friends. We have a very busy WhatsApp chat where we share updates, woes, silly
gifts, anecdotes, all the drama and the stuff that makes up daily life. And this
one, my older sister Claire paved the way for me. She made all the mistakes
first, got caught, got into trouble with our parents, making me the better liar
about what I was up to when it was my turn. That's for manner. So there you go.
There can be benefits from older sisters in all ways. Isn't it wonderful to
hear? It really is. Now, teachers are telling us that a lot of children who went
through this pandemic are the lost generation and they've missed out, especially
those ages you're talking about, age three to six, they've missed out on those
vital years, not only in education, but in social aspects. Now we're hopefully
through the worst of it. What can we do to get our children back in those
spaces? It's a really good point. So I'm doing work at the moment on children's
school readiness and that's a term we often use thinking, is the child ready for
school? But you could also think, is the school ready for the children to come?
So I think schools are having to change a little bit how they do to accommodate
for the fact that the children that are arriving through their doors have had
these difficult experiences, haven't had the same sort of opportunities to pick
up the social skills that they might otherwise have done. So I think as a
community, we need to be seeing that we're all responsible for raising the
child. You know, it's that African saying, isn't it? That it takes a village to
raise a child so that if all of us are thinking of opportunities of experiences
that we can give children that will help them to grow, that's something that we
all ought to do because we're in it together because children are the future.
Thank you, Claire. Thank you so much. That was Professor Claire Hughes from the
Cambridge Center of Family Research. Please do keep your comments coming in. I'm
loving hearing all your stories about your older or younger siblings and how
they've got you out of trouble or helped you in your time of need. Now, my next
guest is Dada Masilo. She's a South African choreographer who is known for her
reworking of classic stories to reflect black female identity. Her latest show
is called Sacrifice and it's inspired by Stravinsky's iconic ballet, Rite of
Spring. The story is about the return of spring and the renewal of the earth
through the sacrifice of a young woman or maiden who is chosen by the community
to dance herself to death. Dada herself plays the role of the maiden in this new
production which is on a national tour of the UK at the moment and will be
performed at the Sadler's Wells in London this weekend. Dada, thank you so much
for coming on the program. It's really me. First of all, can you tell me about
the story? Because I know a little bit about the Rite of Spring and that it's
often called the most controversial ballet of its time. But the original, that
Eastern European folktale is very different to what you're trying to portray
today in Sacrifice, isn't it? How have you moved the story on? How have you
interpreted the Rite of Spring? I think that one of the most challenging things
about the Rite of Spring for me is the thin narrative. And so what I wanted to
do is explore how I can stretch it out because it is divided into the adoration
of the earth which is about the ritual and then the sacrifice which is the
maiden dancing herself to death. So what I wanted to do is I wanted to put it in
the context of South Africa because we've got a lot of rituals, cultures,
traditions, I mean, the rituals for everything in South Africa for getting
married, for death, for parties, for asking for rain. So, you know, I just, I
focused more on that so that I could try and stretch the narrative out because
otherwise it would have just been a dance and I didn't want that. And I wanted
to create a work that would move people. And it was just so interesting now to
hear from the women that you've just spoken to. That in the beginning, I wanted
to make a very dark work but because of COVID, everything just changed
completely. So then the work became about healing and because a lot of the
company members lost their families and friends and there was a lot of grief
going around. So I wanted to go embrace the grief and then let's heal. So that
is what it's about now. It's not about darkness or whatever. I mean, that is
happening around the world anyway. So I think that it's time that we heal
because we live in such a desensitized world where we just hide our feelings and
we just go about our business but we don't let ourselves go and we don't let our
feelings show. So I think that that is really important and because we dance, we
always say we work in a safe space. It's very important for people to just be
able to come to the studio and break down and know that somebody's gonna hide
you without judging you because I mean, during COVID, we were all just going,
yeah, and I think that that's really important. That must have been such a tough
time for you, especially that time when you couldn't do what you loved but you
couldn't support your colleagues, you couldn't perform at all and you couldn't
be together. And it's very interesting to see that sacrifices is a very together
dance, if you know what I mean. You are a tribe, you are together quite closely,
like siblings that we've just been talked about. Was it one of those things you
wanted to express? We're together now, let's go full out here. Yeah, and I think
that we have a saying that we do during our focus, it goes at Mother Earth
community, the universe. So the community are the people that help to make the
sacrifice anyway. So yes, being apart always was a nightmare. And I mean, of
course, there was quite a bit of depression to go with it because if you dance
for a living and that is taken away from you, then what do you do? So it was
frustrating, but I think that that's just through talking to each other about
the work on Zoom and on the phone and throwing ideas around, that really helped.
For me, it was a little bit difficult because I feel as if I've made four works
in a year and a half because we'd go to work for one month and then that'd be
locked down. And then I'd be at home for a month and everything would change.
And I'd change everything and then go back to work. And then we'd do that again.
And then everything would change again. It was a difficult process, but I think
that it was one that I needed to go through because I think that if I just had
three months to make the work, then it wouldn't be the work that it is now.
Amazing. Now you play the maiden, don't you, Dada? Who has been chosen by her
community to dance herself to death so that Spring can arrive. Why did you want
to tell the story from her point of view? Because that's very different to the
original Right of Spring, which was from the community aspect. Because I think
that people need to understand the journey. So there is a journey into being
sacrificed. So it's not just like the community who just decides who is going to
be sacrificed and then the sacrifice happens. But for me, I wanted it to be seen
through the maiden's eyes and to go, okay, I'm going through this journey so
that I can reach that point and say, I'm not okay with it. Because there is a
point where she does fight. She fights it, but then she's told, no, you can't
fight it. And what I'm doing in my version is that I'm choosing her own mother
to sacrifice her. Normally it would be done by a man, but because I didn't want
it to look like rape, I thought, okay, let's have the mother do it because I
think it's also so much more emotional when the mother sacrifices her own child.
Incredibly so, and it's quite hard to watch. I've not seen the whole thing live,
but I've seen many clips of it. And it's what I call a different style of ballet
dance. I'm going to call it on the edge of your seat dance because the rhythms
are so jerky, fast, surprising. How did you find choreographing and dancing to
this? I understand you had to learn a whole new dance style. Is that right? Yes,
I had to learn tonne dance, which is a dance from my heritage. But the complex
rhythms from tonne dance reminded me of Sravinsky's music and the scordins and
just, you know, one minute. Yeah, very quick, sure. I'm very odd. So that was
what inspired me. And so, yeah, that's when inspiration for tonne dance came
through. So it's unpredictable. You don't know what's going to happen. And I
think that when we end performance, sometimes because I've got four musicians,
sometimes we play with each other, tease each other about, OK, when are they
going to go? To make it even more tense than it is. For one scene, you're quite
tall and upright and quite jerky and you all kind of work together in a group in
the middle of the stage. And I think you've described a sort of meerkat dancing
and that is what it looks like. Yeah, that's great. You don't get it on the
cross that way. Yeah, it's a good one. The meerkat family is a community. So and
I wanted to really retain that aspect of it that it's about the community coming
together, working together. And I think for me, ensemble work has always been so
important. You know, they know solos in ensemble work. We all have to get
together and move as one and not OK. I've got a solo to say. Yeah, I mean, there
are solos and whatever. And each solo is about informing the rest of the
community of what is going on. So it's not just there for somebody to showcase
the technique. It is about going, OK, I'm passing on this message from this
person to that person. And then we come together as a community and we create
the sacrifice. Well, it's wonderful, Dada. And I wish you every look with your
tour. Wish the cast look as well or break a leg, as I should say. And thank you
so much for coming on the show and talking so eloquently about it. Lovely to
meet you. Well, thank you. And thank you so much for joining in the conversation
today. I want to reflect on a few of your messages you've sent in. There really
have been so many this morning, but lots of you have responded to our story
about pictures and sexual abuse on the metaverse. This one says my 13 year old
was friends with a 12 year old girl who had given a naked picture of herself to
a boyfriend. The boyfriend broke up with a girl and sent the picture to all his
mates, including my son. My son was horrified, showed the picture to the girl
that she could do something about it. This ended up with a police who called my
son for downloading this type of picture. He was only released after the girl's
father pointed out how ridiculous this was. We need ways for boys to report
these things without the risk of being put on the sex offenders register. My
daughter is six and has already started to ask to play. And we will have loads
more of those coming up in the programme. But it's been lovely to have the time
with you this morning. We will be back tomorrow at 10 o'clock. Make sure you
join in the conversation then. Bye bye. The master of satire, David Sederis, is
back with his unique blend of wit and wisdom. I know that people are now taking
pictures of themselves at funerals because when I looked up selfies at funerals
was the third option. The humorous laughs at life and himself. I've been
studying Japanese. And I'll say something to Hugh. I'll say, oh, did you know
that this is how you say? And he says, we're only going for four days. A new
series of Meet David Sederis.