TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Radio Station. After the news, it's Outlook. During lockdown, Manny Coe, a
British man living in Spain, received a text from his younger brother Ruben in
the UK. Papa, do you love me? So that was the text message that Ruben sent to
me. Brother.do.u.love.me. It wasn't a question. He was basically, I think,
writing big SOS in the sand. Ruben has Down Syndrome and was living in a care
home away from family and friends. The isolation was killing him. Manny knew
that he would have to stage a dramatic rescue. He doesn't often ask for
anything, so I knew that he was serious at this point. And we call it the bro-
nap, don't we, babes? A story of love, recovery and a guest appearance by Whoopi
Goldberg, coming up in a few minutes' time. This is Danielle Jarowiecka with the
BBC News, hello. President Biden has welcomed a deal between Britain and the
European Union over post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. He
called it an essential step to preserve the Good Friday peace agreement. Under
the deal, goods from the British mainland, destined for use in Northern Ireland,
will no longer be subject to customs checks, a key demand of Northern Irish
unionist politicians. But the Democratic Unionist Party politician Sammy Wilson
said unionist support could not be guaranteed. President Biden, more than
anyone, should understand that people should not have things imposed on them if
they don't have a say in them. After all, his own country originated because
they refused to have taxation without representation. And Northern Ireland will
still continue to have foreign law imposed on it without proper representation.
The new framework, however, announced by Prime Minister Rishi Sunak and the
President of the European Commission, marks an easing of tensions between London
and Brussels. As Jonathan Blake reports. In Windsor, Rishi Sunak and the
European Commission President, Ursula von der Leyen, claimed their agreement was
an historic breakthrough that marked a turning point for Northern Ireland and
UK-EU relations. The Prime Minister said it would ensure smooth trade, using
green and red lanes to separate goods staying in Northern Ireland with those
destined for the Republic of Ireland. Sovereignty would be restored, he said,
with the so-called Stormont Break, which could stop new EU laws applying in
Northern Ireland. Serbia and Kosovo have moved closer to accepting a European
Union-brokered peace plan to normalise their tense relations. After hosting
talks in Brussels, the EU's foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, said that both
Kosovo's Prime Minister and the Serbian President endorsed the plan, but needed
further talks on implementing it. Meta Cikrica reports. Serbia and Kosovo are
under pressure from the EU and the United States to normalise their relations
and resolve tensions that have threatened to ignite another war in Europe. The
EU's Josep Borrell said both Kosovo's Prime Minister, Albin Kurti, and the
Serbian President, Aleksandar Vucic, have shown a readiness to find solutions.
Under the deal, Belgrade would accept official documents issued in Kosovo and
agree not to block its membership of international bodies. Kosovo will have to
implement an earlier agreement to establish an association of Serb-majority
municipalities. Saudi activists say that prosecutors have charged 10 senior
judges with high treason, which means they could face the death penalty if found
guilty. The US-based Dawn Group says the charges were announced this month at
the first hearing of their case held in secret. The judges were arrested almost
a year ago and have been held incommunicado since then. You're listening to the
World News from the BBC. More than a thousand people have protested in central
Tel Aviv against a riot by Israeli settlers in the Palestinian town of Hawara.
They condemned the far-right-backed administration of Benjamin Netanyahu over
its support for Jewish settlements in the occupied West Bank. Police made
arrests after some protesters blocked an exit from a major highway. There were
also smaller demonstrations in Jerusalem, Haifa and Beersheba. The US Secretary
of State, Antony Blinken, has arrived in Kazakhstan on the first leg of a trip
aimed at improving America's ties in Central Asia. He's due to meet President
Kassym-Jean-Marc Tokayev and foreign ministers from the region. Central Asian
countries have long-standing ties with Russia but have avoided offering direct
support for Moscow's war. Many Russians escaping military service have fled to
Kazakhstan. The Republican governor of Florida, Ron DeSantis, has approved
legislation taking control of public services in the special tax district
surrounding Walt Disney World's vast theme park. Mr. DeSantis, who's widely
expected to run for president, said Disney's half-century of autonomy gave it an
unfair advantage. Last year, Disney criticized a bill banning school lessons on
sexual orientation in Florida. The co-founder of one of Senegal's most famous
bands, Touré Kounda, has died in Paris at the age of 73. Ismail Touré formed the
group with his brother in the 1970s. Much of their time was spent in France
where they sang in six languages, blending southern Senegalese melodies with
rock, reggae and jazz. Here's the band performing one of their most popular
songs, Senubayo. The group collaborated with other well-known musicians and
bands, including Carlos Santana and Talking Heads. Ismail Touré was also a
social activist, campaigning for the rights of children and the homeless. BBC
World News. Hello, I'm Jo Fidgen. Welcome to Outlook, the home of personal
stories on the BBC World Service. In November 2020, Reuben Coe, a very softly
spoken British man in his late 30s, sent a text to his older brother, Manny, who
was living in Spain. Papa, do you love me? So that was the text message that
Reuben sent to me in between the lockdowns, in between the first lockdown and
the second lockdown. Brother, dot, do, dot, you, dot, love, dot, me, dot. Dot,
not question mark at the end. It wasn't a question. It wasn't a question, no.
Because he knows I love him. Don't you, Reubs? Finger up, yes he does. Tell me
about Reuben and conversation when he was younger. How has language been
throughout Reuben's life, Manny? Reubs learnt slowly. He has Down syndrome and
Down syndrome is a learning difficulty. We call it Up syndrome now, don't we,
Reubs? I can see you pointing up to the ceiling, Reuben. Corrected you
instantly, Manny. It's not Down syndrome, it's Up syndrome. I slapped my wrist,
it's Up syndrome. Reubs has got Up syndrome and he learnt things more slowly
than other people. Just learnt them in a different way. And language for Reuben
has always been indicators, like road signs. And so once you know that language,
then one word can express so much. Because Reuben's internal world is massive.
He has a huge and vibrant imagination. And has lots of hobbies and lots of
things that he loves. And yet, if you don't know what they are, he could say
something which could fall flat with somebody that doesn't know him. But if you
know him, he could say one word which would lead you down a path because you
know where he's coming from. You and I can string a sentence together,
hopefully, that's coherent without really having to think about it. And whereas
Reubs, when he wants to express himself, he has to go in word by word and open a
box and release that word before he can go on to the next one. Do you have a
favourite word, Reuben? Yeah. Doing the sign of a heart. Love. Yeah. Reuben uses
his facial expressions and his hands to help his communication. Throughout our
conversation, he gesticulated a lot, he smiled a lot, he waved the paintbrush
that he always carries with him. And he said a few words in his whispery voice.
Manny does a lot of the interpreting. When we spoke, Reuben was on a video link
from southern England, Manny was on a video link from his home in Spain. And
that's where they were in 2020 in England and Spain, when Reuben sent his
cryptic text message to Manny. Brother dot, do dot, you dot, love dot, me dot.
He was basically, I think, writing big SOS in the sand. It was his way of
communicating to me that he needed help. Is that right, Reuben, that this was a
message calling for help rather than a question? You're nodding. We were several
months into the pandemic by then, and there were very tight restrictions on
travel and on contact. Manny wasn't allowed to leave Spain, where he lives with
his partner, Jack. Reuben wasn't allowed out of the care home in England, where
he was living. In fact, he'd moved in just a few weeks before all the lockdowns
began. So it was quite a drastic change for him. And then just a few weeks after
that, pandemic restrictions come in and everything changes again. You go from
being able to visit regularly to not being able to visit at all. Of course, all
the rules came in about you're not allowed to hug anybody and you're not allowed
to touch someone who's not in your household. And all of these things start
happening, which was hard for everybody, but very hard indeed, I imagine, for
anyone living in that kind of environment where suddenly you're cut off from
your friends and family. Yeah. What kind of differences did you start to notice
in Reuben Manny on video calls? Well, Reuben stopped picking the phone up. We
used WhatsApp to text each other, but he wouldn't pick up the phone to me. I
think he was in free fall at this point, cut off from anything he ever knew. He
was in a town that he didn't really know. Mum and Dad were allowed to visit, but
they could wave at him from the car park through his downstairs bedroom window.
I was stuck in Spain. I couldn't get to him. And we were trusting that Reuben
was OK. We were trusting that he would cling on. But a wave isn't the same as a
hug, is it? Yeah, well, this is where the paintbrush comes in, Jo, because no
one was allowed to touch Reuben and no one was allowed to give him a hug. And so
he used the paintbrush to paint his skin as a way of feeling something. Is that
so, Reuben? Is that what the paintbrush became for you, a sort of way of feeling
something? You're nodding. Yeah. Bless him. It must have been very, very tough
for you, Reuben, being without your family and your friends at that point. Yeah,
very hard. And you stopped eating, I hear. Was that deliberate or did you just
decide you weren't hungry? It's a difficult one for Reuben to verbalise, but I
think with many eating disorders, it's a matter of control. And Reuben's life
was not in it. He wasn't controlling anything. We'd stripped him of his
independence and he was living in a place that he didn't want to be in. It was
cut off from his family, cut off from his friends, cut off from us. And yeah, an
eating disorder started to creep in, but thankfully his carers spotted it really
early. He was stashing food in his bag at lunchtimes and dinners and they found
it in the bin in his bedroom. So they caught it really early on. But I think it
was just an internal protest and Reuben had to express himself somehow. So it
came out in an eating disorder. Yeah. I mean, I know it was hard for you,
Reuben, but it's clearly hard for you too, Manny, because you say you were in
Spain. You weren't allowed to leave Spain at that time because of the pandemic
restrictions. I can see you're crying now. It was clearly terrible for you
having to watch your brother suffer like this and not be able to help. Yeah.
Where is my buddy? Don't worry, brother. I'm all right, brother. Reuben's
leaning into the camera. What are you saying, Reuben? Don't worry. Don't worry,
brother. Don't worry, brother. I love you. Yeah. I don't worry anymore, Reubes,
but I did worry. I was so worried about him and for him. And Reuben and I are so
close that I think our happiness is interlocked. I'm not happy if Reuben's not
happy. And there have been times in my life when I've been unhappy and Reuben's
been there to hold me up. This is the symmetry of our brotherhood. So, yeah,
when Reubes was really bad, it was a torment for me. I couldn't do anything. I
couldn't get there. I would send him messages. I would try and call him. We'd
send him presents. But I just knew he was in a free fall. Several months into
that pandemic and those restrictions, that's when you sent the text, Reuben,
Brother, do you love me? Manny, when you got that text and you say you knew it
wasn't a question, it was an SOS, what was the conversation between you and
Jack, your partner, at that point about how you were going to respond? I said,
I've just got a message from Reubes. And he said, what does it say? And I read
it to him. It just says, brother, do you love me? And I said to him, what am I
going to do? And he said, you know what you've got to do. You've just got to get
on the plane and go and rescue him. Big finger up from Reuben. Yes, you have to
come and rescue me. Yeah, it worked. You know, Reuben's communication is very
clear. He doesn't often ask for anything. So I knew that he was serious at this
point. And we call it the bro-nap, don't we, babes? A bit like a kidnap, but
brotherly. Yeah, a brotherly kidnap. We call it the bro-nap. This is the story
of that bro-nap when Manny sprung his unhappy brother Reuben from a life of
crushing isolation, leaving his work and partner for six months to move in with
Reuben and coax him back to himself, to the joyful person he had been. Reuben
adores films, musicals in particular. And one of the ways he expresses himself
when words don't come so easily is by referencing scenes from movies as a kind
of shorthand. So there's a key point in the film, The Lion King, isn't there,
Reuben? Do you remember when Mufasa comes back to appear to his son who is lost
in the desert? And we use that scene to give Reuben hope. And it's a moment
when, you know, a son is struggling and his father comes back and reminds him of
something from his past. Reubs, can you remember what Mufasa says? Remember who
you are. You are my son. And that's what I was saying to him for those 26 weeks.
Reubs, remember who you are, buddy. Remember who you are. And eventually he
remembered who he was. Papa. In a perfect world, one we've never known. Maybe
you could describe for us, Manny, Reuben's character and particular outlook on
life. Reubs has always been a yes person. And that's why I've always loved
spending time with Reubs, because anything you ever suggested, he was he was on
for it. He was game for a laugh. Normally the last person standing at any party
up for an adventure, you know, always positive about life. And so being with him
when I was if ever I was blue or if ever I was down and plugging myself into
Reubs mentality just helped lift me. That's the way he always was. Everybody
knew Reubs as a party animal and a sociable little guy. And he lived with us
here in Spain for seven years before all of this. This happened and his life was
very full. Going to the gym by himself, going out for lunches by himself, being
social, meeting friends independently, traveling independently, taking buses and
trains and even flew transatlantic by himself to see our other brother in
America. Once from London to Boston. What were the main things that the two of
you would enjoy doing together? Simply being together. I always say that when
when you spend a day with Reubs, the best thing is to not have a plan, because
Reubs imagination when I engage with it will take us down paths that neither of
us could have ever planned. So I think the best times we've ever had is just
when we've had time to to be together. But when we've been on holiday together,
do you remember Marrakech Reubs? Yeah. Reubs and I once took a trip to Marrakech
to come to fulfill two of Reubens dreams, which was to ride a camel dressed in
Joseph and his tentacolour dream coat, pretending to be Joseph escaping from
Egypt. There's your coat. He's got his coat. Look, to show you, Jo. On the back
of the sofa? Yeah. Oh, it's fabulous. And the other one was to reenact the opera
scene from Priscilla Queen of the Desert on top of a Jeep in the middle of the
desert. We fulfilled both dreams. How fantastic. Yeah. One of the best trips of
my life. I hear you also took a pretty memorable trip together when you were
living in Spain. Yeah. Two of you and Manny and your partner Jack, where you
went on the famous pilgrimage walk, the Camino. Oh, yes. Do you remember that
Reubs? Yeah. What was special about that walk and that trip? Well, hug, hug,
hug, hug, hug my mummy. Yeah, he's saying my mummy. Mum and dad met us at the
other end. So they were our destiny, if you like. They were the destination and
they were waiting for us. Reubs walked, it's an amazing achievement for anybody.
He walked 210 miles across northern Spain. And it would take a good walker,
probably take them 12, 13 days. And it took us 26. And this is when I realised
that things in Reubens' world move at half the pace. And it takes Reubs twice as
long to do most things that it might take you or I. But when you enter that
space and plug into his rhythm, you see the world in a wonderful sense of slow
motion. Yeah. Would you do that walk again, Reuben? No. A big emphatic no. Too
far. Are you sure, Reubs? You don't want to do it again? I'm done. I'm done.
Done with walking. Fair enough. So the two of you lived together in Spain for
seven years, along with your partner Jack Manhey. Those seven years of living
together in Spain, what kind of life were you having there? When I first brought
Reubs to live with me in Spain, he gave me a tick list of everything that he
wanted. And it was a DVD shop, a charity shop, a cafe, a gym, a cinema, a
theatre. And he gave me a little tick list. So when Reubs first came to live
with me, I chose that location for him, which was a little town just outside of
Marbella on the south coast. Reubs loved it. And it was a brilliant stepping
stone for him coming into Spain. But I've lived in Spain for 22 years now, but I
didn't want to live on the coast, which is quite a transient community. And I'm
in love with the deeper part of inland Spain. And I wanted to live where my
dreams were. And this was the whole debate. And this is the very difficult thing
about care, is, you know, whose needs are more important? Should I have stayed
in on the coast and compromised my own passions for Reubs? Or should I have
followed my own dreams? And when Jack and I met, we had it very clear in our
minds that we wanted to live in rural Spain. My quote was, I want to live in an
old house in the middle of nowhere, surrounded by olive trees. That was my
dream. And is that where you live now? That's where I'm talking to you from. And
Reuben lived here with us for three years, didn't you, babes? And you turned it
into a big Lord of the Rings adventure, I think. Everybody was a character.
Yeah. And the landscape was interpreted along with Lord of the Rings. Is that
right? Who were all the characters? Reuben was Frodo Backins, right from the
start. And Jack became Samwise Gamgee, the Hobbit sidekick. And they named me
Gandalf the Grey. And this was Middle Earth, wasn't it, Reubs? Reubs decided
this was Middle Earth. And very early on, I remember Reubs took a walk and you
found this stick in the river, Reubs, do you remember? And it looked like
Saruman's stick. Yeah, he's nodding. And so when he found Saruman's stick, we
made, we found a stone to be the orb in the middle of it. And Reuben really did
think that this was Middle Earth. It's a magical place. I'm still in love with
it. And we're in a tug of war still as to what we're going to do with this place
because we're both so in love with it. But Reubs is not here anymore. And we are
a trilogy. We always were a trilogy. And when that trilogy broke up was was a
very painful time for all of us. Why did it have to break up? Can we talk about
this, Reubs? Are we allowed to go there? Are you OK to talk about it? You're
shrugging a bit. Yeah. Now, he's referring to the storm, aren't you, Reubs?
Reubs was in the house by himself one evening. We were both away working and
there was somebody in the house, but it was in the dead of night. So Reubs
didn't realize that he could have gone and got help. And there was a terrible
storm. And that's if people say to me what happened, when did Reubens life
change? When did his personality cave in? It was then. That was the beginning of
it. And when when a storm hits this part of Spain at the end of the summers with
all the hot air that comes in off the Mediterranean, it's called a cold snap.
And it was a historic rainfall. Two hundred and something liters fell in a
matter of three hours. And I think you got really frightened, didn't you, babes?
And mum had three missed calls at three o'clock in the morning from him. When I
got back the next day, he was very quiet, very subdued. That was the beginning
of Reubens breakdown, because Reubens had a full on psychological breakdown just
a few weeks later. It happened on a very hot day when they were all at a
restaurant having lunch. All of a sudden he started to quake from the inside. It
was literally, Joe, it was the only way I can describe it was an internal
earthquake. And I think the beginning of the fear from the storm germinated in
him, his inability to explain what was happening. Perhaps he was having a bit of
a midlife crisis. Perhaps he felt too isolated here and missed contact with
other people. We'd brought him into our dream, but it wasn't his. And he clung
on for dear life as long as he could. And then when we were in this restaurant,
he had a psychological and physical breakdown. He literally fell on the floor as
a pile of bones and said to me, I don't want to die, brother. And it was a
breakdown, wasn't it, babes? Well, yeah, I know it's it's it's all in the past
now. And we're so happy that we can talk about it in the past. Yeah, well done.
But from that moment on, Reuben became nonverbal. It's extraordinary to think
that somebody with so much life and he just became locked in. Although it was a
hard decision, it was felt that Reuben would benefit from an environment where
professional carers would be on hand to support him. And he moved back to the
UK. Manny visited often in the beginning, as did other family members. But then
Covid started to sweep the globe and we know what happened next. Travel
restrictions, no hugging rules, isolation. Reuben went downhill fast. He sent
his SOS text, brother, do you love me? And as soon as he could get on a plane
between lockdowns, Manny flew in to bronap him. And I took Reuben out of care
for a weekend, supposedly on paper. And I had to sign for him, sign for his
medication. And him and I got in the car. It felt like it really did feel like a
scene from a movie. And I was rescuing my brother. Because you knew you weren't
taking him for two days. You were taking him away permanently. Yeah, I knew. So
when bronap happened, Reuben and I drove off and went to a cottage by the sea,
by the Jurassic coast. And it's a family cottage, which is a little farm
cottage. Did you know that, Reuben? Did you know that Manny was coming to take
you away and get you out of that place and to a cottage where the two of you
could stay? You did. He did. Yeah. That was a terrible time because Reuben's
trust had broken down. You know, Reuben and I couldn't mind read each other,
finish each other's sentences. And I've always been there. And we'd screwed up.
You know, we'd got it wrong through no fault of our own. But Reuben didn't
understand that. In Reuben's mind, he'd had this incident. He'd become locked
in. He'd become nonverbal. He was afraid. He was a frightened little guy. And
then he'd moved into a home and wasn't seeing any of us. And no one was actually
taking the time to explain anything to Reuben because people were so
preoccupied. He's shrugging his shoulders. He's so generous. Reuben, you're so
generous with us. You know, there is no... Reuben doesn't hold any grudges. He
readily forgives. And he understands that it was out of our control. But when we
sped away in the bro-nap car, Reuben was a broken man. He was totally nonverbal.
Didn't want to look me in the eye. He was like a little wounded bird. I was
explaining it to someone the other day and, you know, in a storm, an access road
to a house can just cave in and disappear. And therefore you can't get to your
home. That's what I feel happened with Reuben. When this breakdown happened,
there was no way for me to get to him. And before I left, Jack said to me, you
know this is not going to be a quick fix, don't you? And I said, yeah, I know.
But none of us knew how long it was going to take. We're going to take a short
break for the news. When we come back, Manny and Reuben take us on their
difficult road to recovery, helped by a magical lion and a singing nun. This is
Outlook. This is the BBC World Service and here's Harriet Gilbert to tell you
about the next World Book Club. This month we're in France to talk about a most
extraordinary, daring and original novel called Pigtails. When it was published
in 1996, it created an enormous stir. It's not a feminist pamphlet. It's a
feminist book. It is. But I'm not telling you what to think, I hope. It's the
story of a lovely young woman who submits to the sexual demands of the director
of a perfume company. Her body gradually begins to change, growing more and more
like the body of a pig. At some points, she is very animal. At some other
points, she is very human. She oscillates according to the level of aggression
against her. She's not stable. Nobody... It's a story of that, you know. World
Book Club with Marie Dariasek. Saturday at 12 GMT. Coming up in part two of
Outlook, Manny worries how he's going to help his younger brother Reuben, who
has Down syndrome and is facing a crisis. There's very little in this world that
love cannot put right, that love cannot rectify. Obviously, there are things
that love can never succeed in being victorious over, but the countless problems
can be overcome with love. Outlook's back after the news. BBC News with Danielle
Jawowiecka. President Biden has welcomed a deal between Britain and the European
Union over post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. He said it
would help protect the peace secured by the Good Friday Agreement. The largest
unionist party in Northern Ireland has accepted that the deal marks progress,
but says there are still issues of concern. Saudi activists say prosecutors have
charged 10 senior judges with high treason. They're apparently accused of being
too lenient in their judgments. Serbia and Kosovo have moved closer to
normalising ties. The EU says both will endorse a peace plan that would see
Serbia not blocking Kosovo's membership of international bodies. In Ukraine,
President Zelensky has warned of an increasingly difficult situation around the
besieged town of Bahmut. Russian bombardments have reduced much of it to rubble.
The US Secretary of State Antony Blinken has arrived in Kazakhstan on the first
leg of a trip designed to improve America's ties in Central Asia. Many countries
there have long-standing ties with Russia and either abstained or didn't vote on
the UN resolution condemning Moscow's invasion of Ukraine. As vote counting
continues after Saturday's presidential election in Nigeria, the governing
party's candidate is leading, but the two main opposition parties have alleged
fraud. Hong Kong is to drop its Covid mask mandate from Wednesday. Masks won't
be required either outdoors or indoors. The territory's chief executive John Lee
says high-risk facilities like hospitals could decide whether to require staff
or visitors to wear masks. There have been demonstrations in Israeli cities
against a riot by Jewish settlers in the occupied West Bank on Sunday. The
protesters denounced the right-wing government's backing for settlement
expansion. And reports from Mexico say Washington has asked for the son of the
jailed cartel leader Joaquin Guzman to be extradited. BBC News. Hello, I'm Jo
Fidgen. Welcome back to Outlook. And a story about the extraordinary love
between two British brothers and the crisis they faced together during the
pandemic. Manny Coe is in his late 40s. Reuben Coe is 10 years younger. Reuben
has Down syndrome, though he calls it Up syndrome. The two had lived together in
Spain for seven years along with Manny's partner Jack. Reuben, who has a
fantastic imagination and a great love of films, treated the whole experience as
though he were living the Lord of the Rings. He was Frodo, Jack was his sidekick
Samwise Gamgee, Manny Gandalf the Grey. Reuben was always dressing up and acting
out his favourite characters for an audience from The Lion King, Joseph and the
Technicolour Dreamcoat, anything with Whoopi Goldberg. She's a fan of his too,
by the way. Hey Reuben, my name's Whoopi and I'm really glad to meet you. I hear
you like sister act and habits and all kinds of fun and you sound like a good
guy. So I'm saying hello, enjoy life, baby. Have the greatest time ever. And
always. Bye. Reuben may not speak very often, but he certainly knows how to
enjoy life. Or at least he did until Covid changed everything. He was living in
a care home in England at the time and when the travel restrictions came in,
Manny, who was still in Spain, couldn't visit. No one was allowed to hug Reuben.
He took to carrying a paintbrush to stroke his hand so he could feel touched. He
stopped eating. He didn't talk. And eventually he sent Manny a text begging him
for help. Manny responded by getting on a plane as soon as he could and bro-
napping his younger brother, pretending he was taking him for a few days break,
but actually installing the two of them in a cottage on the coast where he hoped
to coax Reuben back to his old self. The psychiatrist gave him a one in ten
chance. There's professional opinion and then there's extraordinary love. Yeah.
That maybe can overcome that. Tell me how you loved Reuben back to health. How
did you go about finding a way in? I had to rebuild him brick by brick and a
large part of that was done with just engaging his senses. So we had five
pillars of our recovery, didn't we, Reubs? And I say our because I had to take
myself to where Reuben was in order to rebuild myself. It's almost like I had to
break myself to be able to build him back up. And when you're met with your
brother, who you love more than anybody on this planet, who is not speaking, not
really eating well, not wanting to do anything, finding it very difficult to get
out of bed in the morning, I tried to engage him through his senses. So we had
really good food, didn't we, Reubs? We had candles that smelled of wonderful
scents. We played lots of music. I tried to get him to move, to walk. That first
walk, I remember we didn't get very far. We got about 200 meters up the lane and
then Reuben was physically tired because he hadn't really moved for months. And
so he had muscle wastage. And that first walk we took, I could see how tired he
was. He was not pretending at this point. He was really, really tired. And he
said, I'm done, brother. I want to go home, he whispered to me. And I said,
Reubs, OK, we can go home now, but tomorrow we're going to do this same walk and
we're just going to go a little bit further. And gradually over a period of
several weeks, we managed to walk all the way into the village, which is about a
mile. But part of Reuben's recovery was helping him believe that he could get
better. He's a very decisive young man. He knows who he is and he can be very
stubborn. And he put up a lot of fight. So it was a struggle. It was a battle of
wits. Here was me trying to help Reuben to get better and here was Reuben not
wanting to get better and pushing back. So in the daytimes, you would try to get
out for a walk. What about the evenings? Well, it was dark by four. So we would
light the candles, wouldn't we, Reubs? We'd make a dinner. It was Reuben's job
to set the table. And we'd try and enjoy being together. But initially, Reubs
would just eat half of his dinner, refused to eat the other half, and then
shuffle off to bed because he was really struggling. It's hard to take ourselves
back there, but Reuben had really closed down at this point and there was no
enjoyment in his life. I tried to get him to laugh, I tried to get him to dance
and watch his old favourite DVDs and musicals and tried to plug in his
imagination to Sister Act and Whoopi Goldberg and The Lion King. But he just
wasn't interested. But one thing that happened really, really early on, which is
key in this whole story, is that Reuben wasn't talking, but he was drawing. And
every single night, without fail, before he went to bed, he'd give me a little
kiss on my cheek and hand me a piece of art upside down. And I wasn't allowed to
look at it until he'd gone upstairs, otherwise he would give me a moody face. So
when he was in his bedroom, I would turn it over and Reuben would draw me
something similar to this. So this is a picture of the characters from Narnia,
from The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe. That's Aslan, the lion who saves
everybody, saves the world. Yeah. Is that the witch next to Aslan? The White
Witch. And at the bottom, every single night, he would say, Sleep well, brother,
love you. So he wasn't able to say that he loved me, but he was able to write
it. Yeah. Do you still draw every day? Yeah. What those pictures, Manny, when
you started receiving them, what did they do to you? I was so relieved, Jo, when
he started communicating with me, because I realised that Reuben was broken, but
he wasn't done. They gave me hope. Reuben would draw his feelings, Manny would
write his down, a chronicle of those six months, which has become a book
beautifully illustrated by Reuben, that he had picked up his felt tips again,
was bringing Manny hope. But sometimes that wasn't enough. Living with Reuben,
living for Reuben, was taking its toll. Things got pretty bad, actually. I was
missing my partner. My business was falling off the edge of a cliff. I work in
travel. I had no money. And it was just the idea of who's caring for the carer.
It was funny because there were chinks of hope, and we would have a good day.
And I'd go to bed fooling myself that we'd gained ground in this battlefield and
think, you know, we're making headway here. And then in the morning, Reuben was
as bad or worse than he had been the day before. And it was that constant
demoralisation of not knowing if any of what we were attempting was working, if
Reuben was getting better. But I'm a fighter, and I know Reuben's a fighter. And
he fights for what's right, and he fights for what he wants. Don't you, Reubes?
Oh, he's saying, oh. He's going, yeah, you know, not on your nelly. He's sort of
being dismissive, but he knows that he's a strong guy. I know he's a strong guy.
Well, there was that day, wasn't there, when you walked off, Manny, you just
couldn't cope anymore. And that's when, Reuben, you really proved... Are we
going to go, then? Yeah, go on. Let's talk about that. That was the bleakest
day. It was in February, and I think I hit a wall. Reubes and I were walking to
get to a little farm shop just to get out of the house, and Reubes didn't want
to walk. He just planted himself in the middle of a field and said, I'm done,
brother. And I turned round to him and said, well, so am I, mate. So am I. And
I'm not proud of the fact, but I just left him. I abandoned Reubes in the middle
of a field, and I was the bad brother and the carer that couldn't care at that
point. And I ran back to the house because I didn't want to see anybody, and I
threw myself under the duvet and was out. I think I had a mini nervous breakdown
because I don't really remember much in the afternoon. And I slept for several
hours, and when I woke up, it was dark. I immediately ran through to Reuben's
room, panicking, thinking, oh, my goodness, you know what? It all came back to
me, what I'd done. And he was fast asleep in bed, so relieved. And then I went
downstairs, and there was the remains of a peanut butter sandwich on the side in
the kitchen and a teddy bear on the kitchen counter with a price tag on its ear
that said $3.99 and a little card by it in a yellow envelope. I will never, ever
forget it. And I opened the card, and in the card, Reuben had written, love will
find a way, brother. And I grabbed the card, and I grabbed the teddy bear, and I
just tried to work out where on earth it might have come from. And I realized it
had come from the local garage, and the only way that Reuben could have bought
it is by walking there, and the garage is a mile away from the house. So I
realized in that moment when Reuben was asleep upstairs that when I abandoned
him and when I caved in, when I hit a wall, Reuben, at that point, something in
him reacted, and he realized that he needed to look after his brother. And
that's when he took himself to the local garage a mile away, bought the teddy
bear with a five-pound note that he had in his pocket, which I didn't even know
he had, and came home and went to bed. And that was a really pivotal moment in
our story because that's when Reuben clung on to a message that he believes in,
that love can find a way. That's right, isn't it, Reubs? A very emphatic yes.
There's very little in this, yeah, there's very little in this world that love
cannot put right, that love cannot rectify. Obviously there are things that love
can never succeed in being victorious over, but the countless problems can be
overcome with love. So from that moment on, he restored my faith in him and in
the possibility of him getting better. Reuben, when you went to go and get that
teddy and that card for Manny, were you looking for a way to say to him, it will
be OK, we will make it through this together? Yeah. Yeah. And you did, you did
make it through, of course, but six months you were together in that cottage.
Yeah. What is it you call it? Is it brother dream time? Is that what you call
it, Manny? Brother dream time. Yeah. When it felt like a dream, felt like a
nightmare a lot of the time. Yeah. But there's this fantastic sort of moment,
isn't it, where as well as the drawings, you start to express your creativity in
other ways, Reuben, and you start loving to dress up again and to put on your
outfits from various of your favourite films and perform Friday Night Musical.
Oh, you're holding up a nun's costume. So I'm guessing, as I know you're a big
fan of Whoopi Goldberg and Sister Act, that this is when you were Whoopi
Goldberg. Yeah. MUSIC Together they choose a musical, Sister Act was a
favourite, and spend all week rehearsing a scene and getting the costume and the
props right, and then Manny would stream Reuben's performance to their family
and friends. It was the highlight of the week and a massive breakthrough. When
you had got to that point and you realised that Reuben was really well on the
road to recovery, you're then facing a decision, aren't you, because you've been
together for months, you were there for six months in all, and as you say, you
had a life elsewhere, and you've got to make a decision that is right for you
and a decision that is right for Reuben because you've got that responsibility
as well for someone else's life. How painful was that decision to go back to
Spain and for Reuben to move into different accommodation? It was a tough
decision, but I started knocking on doors and making phone calls to see if there
was somewhere where Reuben could live semi-independently in assisted living, and
there was something about this town where Reuben's is, it was very Reuben-like.
Let me guess, it had a DVD shop, it had a charity shop, it had a cinema. There's
a theatre, charity shops that sell DVDs, a lovely cafe that sells wonderful
brownies. It wasn't a big city, it was a friendly town, it was on a scale that
Reuben could cope with. With your own front door for the first time, I think,
Reuben. Yeah. When you first moved in, and I know Manny came to stay with you
for a little while while you settled in, but when you first moved in, you know,
unlocked your front door for the first time, how did it feel? Big thumbs up.
Yeah. I think you like to tease Manny, don't you? I think you might have played
a joke on him on that occasion. They gave him his keys to his own house. It was
a massive moment in Reuben's life. And he found me in the garden and shook the
keys and said, look, brother, yeah, there you go, he's jangling the keys. And I
let him go up to the flat by himself because I wanted him to feel himself in
that space. It was his flat, not mine. And after about half an hour, I went up,
knocked on the door, and can you remember what you said, Reubes? Um... Not
today, thank you. Not today, thank you. Not today, thank you. Like he's some
kind of travelling salesman. Yeah, slammed the door in my face. I say. And when
he played that little joke on me and slammed the door in my face, I was in the
hallway just whooping it up, thinking, you know, he's back. He is back. He's
back. Yeah. How are you finding your flat, Reuben? Are you enjoying living
there? Yeah. And how are you finding it, Manny, living apart from Reuben now? I
miss him. I miss him a lot. I know, I love you too, buddy. He's sending you a
big hug. He's sending me a big hug. But it's a new chapter. It's a big ask.
We're asking him again to live in a new house with new people in a new town. Oh,
Reubes just sent me a WhatsApp. That's clever of you, Reubes. He's just sent me
the Colour Purple music. What's the significance of the Colour Purple music to
the two of you? What's the significance, Reubes? Why is that important? Yeah.
Very complicated hand gestures going on. It looks like two people meeting in the
middle. The music Reube's referring to, which he's just sent me, is the finale
music to one of Whoopi Goldberg's films, The Colour Purple. And it's one of
Reube's favourite films. And at the very end, for those of you that have not
seen the film, there are two sisters that are separated by life's tragedies. And
at the very end of the film, they're reunited. And this is the music that
they're reunited to. It's the backdrop to their reunion. And it's a very
important piece of music for Reube and I because it signifies for him that
moment when we came back together and found each other as brothers. 26 weeks of
reunion. But we got there, we cracked it. So, Reube, is that you sending Manny a
message just now, saying how pleased you are at the reunion and coming together
again? Yes. I love you, Baba. Reube and Manny co, their book is called Brother,
Do You Love Me? I think we all know the answer to that. Thanks for your company
today. Outlook's back same time tomorrow. It's February 1973. The prairies of
the western United States and a group of American Indians are about to make a
stand at a site that is, to them, deeply significant. The place is Wounded Knee.
That first morning, it was very cold. I went outside with Edgar Bear Runner and
Sivit Young Bear and we were looking to the east. The sun hasn't come up yet,
but we just stood there looking east. I said, we're never going to get out of
here alive. And Sivit Young Bear said, just like our ancestors. The ancestors
were the Sioux Indians massacred at Wounded Knee by the US cavalry in 1890, and
the men gathered there before that dawn more than 80 years later were members of
the American Indian movement. They had already staged a series of publicity-
grabbing actions. Their aim was to air their grievances over the management of
Indian reservations and draw attention to what they regarded as the wider
injustices inflicted on their people for generations. Among the most seasoned
activists was Russell Means. At that time, our people were in a state of great
distress. At that time, our people were ashamed to be Indians and I and the
American Indian movement rose up. The American Indian movement, we had a slogan.
We refused to turn the other cheek or bend over and get the other two kicked.
Our motto was self-defence. And so the activists stormed the symbolic settlement
at Wounded Knee, which lies on an Indian reservation in South Dakota. There was
about 200 of us. We had no repeating arms whatsoever, no repeating rifles. Maybe
all total, when we first went in there, we had 20 guns. But the trading post had
rifles and ammunition. And so we looted that. And your first moves as you got to
the settlement, you began to dig in, to take control? Well, when we first went,
we went to the trading post itself and took that over and gave out all the food
to the locals, whatever they could carry. They had a museum there for tourists.
So that was emptied out. We repossessed all the grave-robbing articles they had
stolen from our graves and then would sell to the tourists. And then we went up
to the top of the hill where the church was. We figured that would be our last
stand. So we fortified our places around. We put all the cars surrounding the
church so if they came, we would throw on the headlights as a form of
protection. And that was going to be our last stand, up on the hill where the
mass grave is of the over 300 Indian people buried in a mass grave by the United
States cavalry. US Marshals and FBI agents poured into the area and surrounded
the activists. Military jets roared overhead and helicopters circled. A siege
had begun that would last for 71 days. Media interest was intense. This is where
the television crews await the hour-by-hour events in Wounded Knee. This
privileged position is protected by the Indian chiefs. Clearly the chiefs are
anxious that this rebellion and its outcome receive as much publicity as
possible. Vince Harveo was one of the spokesmen. The attitude is one of
willingness to give a supreme sacrifice in order to bring a change about in the
federal government's handling of Indian affairs, both socially and judicially.
The Indian people now are beginning to feel, you know, that we have been the
most patient and it hasn't gotten us anywhere. We have to begin to look at the
other side of the coin and say, well, maybe if it takes violence to wake up
somebody's thinking, then maybe this is what it's going to have to be. GUNFIRE
Almost daily, firing either in the night or in the day. They love firing their
munitions with those tracers. You know, there's something like seven or eight
shells between each tracer. Yeah, we saw that. Two government agents were
wounded and on the Indian side, 13 were hurt and two killed. But for Russell
Means, those dangerous days at Wounded Knee were a time of liberation. Free. It
was totally free. It was a walk in freedom. I didn't care. Nobody in there gave
a damn how many people were surrounding us, firing at us. Man, we were free. For
the first times in our life, we were free, man. The government forces were
blockading the activists and they began to run desperately short of food. On the
50th day of the standoff, a peace campaigner, Bill Zimmerman, flew a light
aircraft over Wounded Knee and dropped supplies to the Indians. Why does he
think the siege lasted so long? It would have been very simple for the federal
forces to go into Wounded Knee and take over. There would have been some
casualties, but probably the government would have considered them tolerable.
What made it so interesting was that the Indians existed underneath a protective
bubble of publicity and shame, because everybody knew that this was the site of
the last massacre of the Indian wars and the last thing the government wanted to
see was a massacre on the same site. After the standoff, the Indians got a major
boost to their morale on Oscar night in Hollywood. Marlon Brando turned down his
Academy Award. In his place at the ceremony, a woman in full Apache dress,
Satchine Littlefeather, appeared on stage. She announced that Brando had stayed
away partly because of the way Hollywood portrayed the Indian people and partly
to show his support for those holding out at the famous site in South Dakota.
After long negotiations, an agreement was reached and the siege finally ended on
May 5th. But Russell Means believes his people took much from the stand they
made at Wounded Knee. Pride and self-confidence. Something you can't measure.
Self-dignity and pride throughout the Americas. And we lit a spark, man. And
that spark ended up with Indian people throughout the Americas being recognized,
being paid attention to. We have people now struggling to preserve our languages
and we are internationally connected and continually are at the United Nations
exposing the crimes, the illegal crimes of the United States of America and its
subordinate nations. The spark that lit the flame was Wounded Knee in 1973.
Russell Means died on the 22nd of October 2012. He is remembered as one of the
most prolific organizers of the American Indian movement and was behind some of
the most well-known campaigns of the indigenous civil rights era, including a
prayer vigil atop the disputed site of Mount Rushmore and the seizing of the
replica Mayflower in Plymouth, Massachusetts. Although the American Indian
movement disbanded in the early 1980s, many of its original aims are still being
pursued by different indigenous tribes across America. The redistribution of
land remains a primary concern. Russell Means was talking to Alan Johnston in
2011 for that edition of Witness History. This is the BBC World Service with the
invention of Russia. We're telling the story of the largest country in the
world. In episode three of the series, Catherine the Great comes to power when
her husband is murdered. She was very involved in the coup but not necessarily.
We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-
party services and platforms and the BBC stream you are currently listening to
will stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart
speaker and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're
listening on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.