TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The BBC News at 6 o'clock. This is Alan Smith. Good evening. Shemeema Begin,
the East London schoolgirl who ran away to join the Islamic State group, has
lost her appeal to be allowed to come home. Her lawyers say the fight isn't
over. This is an extraordinary judgement, delivered in an extraordinary way, in
which the Commission is clearly deeply troubled. Yes, we have no tomatoes, or
peppers or cucumbers. Tesco, the UK's biggest supermarket, is the latest to put
limits on fruit and veg. One item in six in a supermarket, Charlie, is actually
fruit veg or salad. And prices were already going up at a really high rate
before this latest shorted. An independent investigation has been ordered into
the Lancashire Police search for Nicola Bully. Nurses leaders in England have
begun pay talks with ministers, but other NHS staff have announced a new strike.
Rishi Sunak has told MPs they will get a say on any deal on post-Brexit trading
rules for Northern Ireland. In the past few minutes, it's been announced that
Wales' Six Nations Rugby Union match against England will go ahead this weekend.
Also tonight, Vladimir Putin puts on a show in Moscow, and Starbucks starts
serving coffee with a shot of olive oil. Shamima Begum, who travelled to Syria
as a schoolgirl to join the Islamic State group, has lost her latest legal bid
to regain British citizenship. The Special Immigration Appeals Commission
accepted there was evidence she had been a victim of trafficking when she left
the UK as a 15-year-old with two of her friends. But the tribunal said it was
lawful for the Home Secretary to revoke her citizenship and bar her from
returning to the UK on the grounds of national security. Her lawyers have
described the ruling as extraordinary and vowed to continue their legal battle.
Our Home Affairs correspondent, Daniel Sanford, reports. In their ruling, the
judges said they found this a case of great concern and difficulty. Shamima
Begum left her home in East London eight years ago. She was 15 years old. Along
with two school friends, she travelled to Turkey and was smuggled across the
border to what was then Islamic State-controlled Northern Syria. Within days,
she'd been married to an IS fighter. When Shamima Begum re-emerged as IS rule
collapsed in February 2019, the then Home Secretary Sajid Javid took away her
British citizenship, saying she was a threat to national security. Shamima
Begum's lawyers argued at the Special Immigration Appeals Commission that the
Home Secretary should have instead treated her as a child victim of trafficking
for sexual exploitation. In their ruling, the judges said there was a credible
suspicion that she'd been trafficked and harboured for the purposes of sexual
exploitation. But they decided in the end that that did not trump the Home
Secretary's power to remove her British citizenship on grounds of national
security. Shamima Begum's solicitor, Gareth Pearce, warned that it had been a
lost opportunity to put into reverse a continuing injustice. The outcome that we
face is that no British child who has been trafficked outside the UK will be
protected by the British state if the Home Secretary invokes national security.
And the government's own independent reviewer of terrorism legislation Jonathan
Hall-Casey said that the UK was increasingly out of step with other countries
which are taking women back from the camps in north-east Syria. I do wonder,
whatever happens in this litigation now, bringing it forward to 2023 when the
camps are just beginning to be emptied out of Europeans, whether the UK is
prepared to be an outlier on that. If nothing else, it would create this awful
spectre of Britain's Guantanamo. I'm sure it would be a propaganda coup for
Britain's enemies. Speaking before today's decision to the makers of the BBC
documentary and podcast The Shamima Begum Story, the young woman herself clearly
had little hope of making it back to Britain. What do you think you'll be doing
in seven years' time from now? I'd still be in this camp. Really? Yeah. You
don't think you'll be home? Nope. Not at all? Nope. Why not? Because ISIS was
the worst thing of the 21st century and I was a part of it and now I have to
face the consequences of my actions and this camp is the consequences of my
actions. Shamima Begum's legal team will continue to challenge the government's
decision, but home secretaries do have huge powers to take away British
citizenship when national security is at stake. And the podcast I'm Not a
Monster, the Shamima Begum Story, is available to listen to on BBC Sounds. Two
more of the UK's biggest supermarkets, Tesco and Aldi, have become the latest to
introduce limits on the sale of certain fruit and vegetables. Asda and
Morrison's have already imposed restrictions because of shortages caused by
extreme weather affecting harvests abroad. The problems coincided with growers
in the UK providing fewer supplies this year because of rising production costs
at home. Our business correspondent Mark Ashdown has more details. With widening
gaps on their shelves, Tesco has now put a buying limit of three items per
customer on tomatoes, peppers and cucumbers. Aldi has done the same. They
followed Asda, which has also restricted those products but has gone further,
also putting limits on lettuce, salad bags, broccoli, cauliflower and
raspberries. You can buy three of each on one visit. If you shop in Morrison's,
you can buy no more than two each of tomatoes, cucumbers, lettuce and peppers.
The supermarkets say extreme weather over the past year in Europe and North
Africa has hit their suppliers. The UK relies heavily in the winter months on
imported produce. Jed Futter is a retail consultant and says rising costs this
year have also led to UK growers producing less than usual. Energy bills for
greenhouses, they've gone up seven-fold and if you can't recover that, if your
growing products and your energy bill is that high, if you can't recover that
and get the cost you will go bust. So it's much cheaper just to have nothing
there whatsoever. While last year's fuel shortages and transport delays were
widely attributed to Brexit, these shortages are not thought to be related to
the UK leaving the EU. But Fraser McEvitt from the analyst Kantar said prices
could still be affected. One item in six in a supermarket, Charlie, is actually
fruit veg or salad. And prices were already going up at a really high rate
before this latest shortage. So for instance, price of cucumber up 42%. Price of
two and a half kilo bag of potatoes was up about 22%. So this price is really
hitting people's budgets. The government says UK food supply chains are
resilient and well equipped to deal with disruption. All the supermarkets
involved said they hope to end the buying restrictions within the next few
weeks. Lancashire police are facing a number of investigations into the way they
handled Nicola Bully's disappearance. The country's police and crime
commissioner is setting up an independent review after criticism that officers
released too much personal information. Ms Bully, who was 45, had been missing
for more than three weeks when her body was found on Sunday afternoon. Here's
our North of England reporter Nick Garnett. It took police more than three weeks
to find Nicola Bully's body, which was discovered in Reeds and the River Wire on
Sunday. In the preceding days, Lancashire police released highly personal
information about her medical background and well-being. Information, the family
said the mother of two would never have wanted to be made public, but it was
being done to deter the sale and publication of stories to newspapers about
Nicola. Police said they did it to help explain why they firmly believed Ms
Bully had gone into the river. There has been widespread criticism of the
force's actions, with some accusing it of victim blaming or, at the very least,
being indiscreet. A number of reviews of those decisions will now be held.
Firstly, the Information Commissioner's office is to look at the release of the
highly personal details, while Lancashire Police and Crime Commissioner Andrew
Snowden has announced the College of Policing will begin its own wide-ranging
independent inquiry. It is right that we ask those questions around why that
information was released and make sure that is properly reviewed by the ICO
about the investigation and use experts who can have access to the information
in the investigation and can have the national standards to hand and are the
national lead experts in this area to make those assessments. Meanwhile, the
Independent Office for Police Conduct has launched its own inquiry into previous
contact between the police and the family after a police car was called to the
house earlier in January. Also today, the inquest into Nicola Bully's death was
opened and adjourned. The coroner said he was satisfied the body was that of
Nicola Bully after dental records were examined. A full inquest is due to be
held in June. British Steel has confirmed it is to close its coking ovens in
Scunthorpe with a loss of up to 260 jobs. The company's Chinese owners are
blaming high inflation and energy costs. Unions say the plan is devastating for
the UK steel industry. More details from our business editor, Simon Jack.
British Steel plans to close the ovens that turn coal into the hot burning coke
that feeds the steel furnaces. Energy prices are 60% higher here than in Germany
and workers leaving Schiff today were making that connection. We are seeing its
energy prices at the minute. Obviously rising cost of living it. You use a lot
of electric running a pump like this. The Chinese owners Jingye have said they
are looking to make further cost savings. Unions fear that means hundreds more
job losses and say the future of steel making in the UK is on a knife edge. Mike
Wilkinson is regional officer for the Unite Union. Well, our fear is that the
recent announcements are probably just the tip of the ice bag and if it closes I
would see Scunthorpe as being almost on its knees. The government described
today's news as disappointing given negotiations are ongoing to provide British
Steel and the Port Talbot plant owners Tata with around £300 million each in
support. These offers are conditional on long term job guarantees and are tied
to decarbonisation goals that the firms say will cost billions. Recent comments
from the Business Secretary Kemi Badnock that it was not a given the UK needed
its own steel industry have set alarm bells ringing throughout the sector. Pay
talks have begun between ministers and the Royal College of Nursing after the
union suspended next week's strike in England. But Unison has announced other
NHS staff will hold another day of strike action across England next month in an
escalation of their dispute. Our health correspondent Sophie Hutchinson reports.
There's yet to be any word from the talks between the health secretary and
nurses which have been held this afternoon. There is however some hope that the
two sides will find common ground to reach a deal on a pay rise for nurses in
England. Meanwhile, outside the negotiating room the relationship between the
government and other health care unions seems to have deteriorated during the
day. A new strike was announced for the 8th of March by Unison across nine of
England's ten ambulance trusts and at some hospitals including specialist blood
and transplant services. Along with that the flicker of hope for the meeting
between the Doctors Union, the British Medical Association and government
officials was quickly extinguished this afternoon with the BMA saying it was
very disappointed the health secretary had decided not to attend. It said there
was no offer on the table and that it was made clear the government was not
ready to enter negotiations. It means the planned three day walkout by junior
doctors next month, the longest ever attempted by NHS medics, will still go
ahead. But the government has said the health secretary met the BMA in January
and now wants to arrange another meeting as soon as possible. The rail union
Aslev has announced that London Underground drivers will walk out on the 15th of
March, the day the chancellor announces his budget. Aslev said 99% of the
drivers who took part in the ballot had voted in favour of strike action in a
dispute over pensions and working arrangements. Around 100,000 civil servants in
the Public and Commercial Services Union are also planning to strike on budget
day as part of a dispute about pay, jobs and pensions. Rishi Sunak has told MPs
that Parliament will have a chance to express its view on any changes to
Northern Ireland's trading arrangements negotiated with the EU. But he told
Prime Minister's questions that intensive discussions were still taking place.
The Labour leader, Sakiya Stama, accused Mr Sunak of failing to stand up to what
he called the wreckers on the conservative benches who opposed the changes.
Here's our political correspondent, Jonathan Blake. Downing Street insists a
deal has not yet been done, but the Prime Minister is coming under pressure to
reveal details of an agreement with the EU which had looked close to being
announced this week. Sakiya Stama pressed Rishi Sunak on what he said were the
trade-offs that needed to be faced up to. Northern Ireland, Sakiya said, would
have to follow some EU law to avoid a hard border with the Irish Republic and
there would need to be a role for the European Court of Justice. Rishi Sunak
responded with what he said were his criteria. I am a conservative, a Brexiter
and a unionist in any agreement that we reach needs to tick all three boxes. It
needs to ensure sovereignty for Northern Ireland. It needs to safeguard Northern
Ireland's place in our union and it needs to find practical solutions to the
problems faced by people and businesses. Asked if MPs would get a vote on
changes to the Northern Ireland Protocol, the Prime Minister said Parliament
would of course express its view. Did that mean a vote? Downing Street later
said it wouldn't get into hypotheticals. Sakiya Stama repeated his pledge to
support any deal reached with the EU and sought to highlight conservative
divisions. It's the same old story. The country has to wait while he plucks up
the courage to take on the malcontents, the reckless, the wreckers on his own
benches. But I am here to tell him he doesn't need to worry about that because
we will put country before party and ensure that Labour votes to get it through.
The Prime Minister accused Labour of agreeing to anything the EU offered, which
wasn't a strategy he said but surrender. Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, the Westminster
leader of Northern Ireland's main unionist party, the DUP, asked for a guarantee
that the current trading arrangements would be replaced. It is unacceptable that
EU laws are imposed on Northern Ireland with no democratic scrutiny or consent.
And will he assure me that he will address these fundamental constitutional
issues and do so not just by tweaking the protocol but by rewriting the legally
binding treaty text? Mr Sunak said he had heard loud and clear the DUP's
concerns. This afternoon the Prime Minister held a call with business leaders in
Northern Ireland. Last night he spoke again to the President of the European
Commission Ursula von der Lion and this evening the Foreign Secretary James
Cleverley met Tory backbenchers as the government continues to try to shore up
enough support to finalise a deal. You're listening to the 6 o'clock news on BBC
Radio 4, the main news so far. Judges have rejected Shemeema Begum's appeal
against the decision to bar her from the UK for joining the Islamic State Group
when she was 15. Tesco has become the latest supermarket to limit sales of
tomatoes, cucumbers and peppers. Still to come? Are you not stretching enough?
Or are you not pulling through on the sally quite firmly enough? Or have you got
not quite the right amount? Yes, that made all the difference. An invitation to
Ding Dong Merrily on High for the coronation. The Russian President Vladimir
Putin appears to have confirmed that his Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping is
planning a visit to Moscow. President Putin has held talks with China's most
senior foreign policy official days before the anniversary of Russia's invasion
of Ukraine. Russia thanked China for what it described as its consistently
balanced position on the war. President Putin went on to address crowds filling
Moscow's main stadium for a patriotic gala from where our Russia editor Steve
Rosenberg reports. Today the Kremlin put on a show to rally Russians around
their president and his war in Ukraine. At the stadium which hosted the 2018
Football World Cup Final, patriotic pop songs were the warm-up act, plus
speeches reminding Russians that their country had defeated Napoleon and Hitler
and would be victorious in Ukraine. The event was highly staged managed, tens of
thousands of people had been bust in from colleges, factories and state
enterprises. President, the Russian and Russian soldiers, back from the front
line, the Kremlin leader declared, right now there is a battle on our historical
frontiers for our people. They are fighting heroically, courageously, bravely.
Three cheers, hoorah! State propaganda here tells Russians that it was the West
that started the war in Ukraine. Many in the stadium seem to believe that. We
didn't start all this, Irina tells me, I trust our president. Not everyone here,
though, was so enthusiastic. In temperatures of minus 15, we saw large crowds
streaming away from the stadium, even before Vladimir Putin arrived. Independent
investigators have issued a critical report into the deaths of three women who
were being cared for by a maternity unit in Derbyshire. The report into
University hospitals of Derby and Burton found the women may have survived if
lessons had been learned from previous reviews. Investigators also noted
failings in the way staff dealt with four other serious cases, as our social
affairs correspondent Michael Buchanan reports. All sovereign cases, three
deaths and four potentially life-threatening incidents, occurred over a 16-month
period between January 2021 and May 2022. The review, carried out by the Health
Care Safety Investigation Branch, found that while the incidents did not have
common themes, robust action planning and the prompt addressing of learning from
previous investigations may have had an impact on the care the seven women
received. They also found there was substantial evidence of poor behaviours,
bullying and a hierarchical culture, especially within the obstetrics team.
Aaron Horsey, whose wife Bernadette died at the Royal Derby Hospital in January
2022, moments after giving birth to their son, said he was dismayed by the
findings. To me, it goes to show the importance of having a really thoroughly
embedded atmosphere where learning is taken on board and it's just clear that
this particular trust historically has not had that. In a statement, the
University hospitals of Derby and Burton Trust apologised to all sovereign
families and said they had already addressed the report's immediate
recommendations. Several deaths are on the increase in the United Kingdom. The
number of women who died either while pregnant or up to six weeks after giving
birth rose by 19% between 2017-2019 and 2020-2022, with deaths from suicide,
preeclampsia and hemorrhage all increasing. Palestinian officials say at least
10 people, including an elderly man and several militants, have been killed by
Israeli forces during a raid in the occupied West Bank. As described hearing
explosions and gunfire as troops entered the city of Nablus, the Israeli
military said its forces were looking for terror suspects. Our Middle East
correspondent Tom Bateman is in Nablus. Explosions and gunfire sounded in the
heart of Nablus as armoured troop carriers and soldiers with dogs raided the
narrow streets of the old city. It triggered armed clashes with Palestinian
gunmen before Israeli troops fired shoulder-launched missiles at a house in
which three senior Palestinian militants were holed up, having said they
wouldn't surrender. Israel says they were involved in the killing of a soldier
last year and were planning imminent attacks. But several of those killed
outside are civilians, including two elderly men, while footage shows young men
apparently unarmed running away as gunshots are heard before one falls to the
ground. The Israeli army said it was reviewing the video. Palestinian officials
called it a massacre, while the militant group Hamas said its patience was
running out. After a spate of Palestinian armed attacks, Israel's military
search and arrest raids in the occupied West Bank have intensified over the last
year and this one is one of the deadliest since 2005, with a huge number also
injured. Health officials say more than 80 people have suffered bullet wounds
now being treated in five different hospitals. It is a further sign that recent
attempts by the US to ease spiralling tensions are failing. For the first time,
crime figures in the UK show that paedophiles are using virtual reality headsets
to view and share child abuse imagery. The data was obtained by the children's
charity the NSPCC, which contacted every police service in the UK. The survey
also showed a record number of offences involving the possession of illegal
images of children, Angus Crawford reports. Although the numbers were small,
only eight recorded offences involved the use of VR headsets across the country.
The NSPCC warns that this may be just the tip of the iceberg and an emerging
threat to young people. Experts predict rapid growth in the use of virtual
reality devices and are moved by tech companies into more immersive online
experiences in the so-called metaverse. Researchers overall showed there were
more than 30,000 crimes recorded last year for sharing and possession of child
abuse imagery. Almost 10,000 offences involved popular gaming or social media
platforms. Officials in Japan say they have solved the mystery of a large iron
ball that washed up on a beach, triggering nationwide alarm about possible
foreign skulduggery. Bomb disposal experts were deployed and images were
analysed by experts in espionage. But the truth was far more prosaic, as our
Tokyo correspondent Shima Halu reports. From speculation about whether it was an
unexploded bomb from the Second World War or an old mooring boy, there were
hundreds of comments about the mysterious metal ball since it washed up on the
beach at Hamamatsu. The Japanese broadcaster NHK showed footage of two officials
looking at a big rusty sphere, about a metre and a half wide. One man who came
to the beach for a run told local media he tried to push the ball, but that it
wouldn't budge. Fears that it could be a stray mine were dismissed after bomb
squad experts examined the object and said it posed no threat. Local authorities
say it will be removed soon. There are no indications it was anything to do with
espionage by North Korea or China, but the mysterious ball washed up amid
nervousness about Chinese surveillance balloons. In the past hour it has been
announced that a strike by Welsh rugby players, which could have led to the
cancellation of the Team Six Nations match against England on Saturday, has been
averted. Members of the squad had threatened to boycott the game, worth £10m, to
the Welsh Rugby Union because of a dispute about their contracts. The players
had been unhappy about a proposal to cut their salary and introduce a 20%
performance-related element. The Welsh rugby captain Ken Owens, who's been
involved with the talks, gave his reaction. It has been a really tough, tough
sort of, another event in Welsh rugby, which is hugely frustrating, but it's
been a difficult period of the last year, 18 months. I hope we don't end up here
again. One thing I can say from a player's point of view is it has been tough,
but we have fronted up in training. We've prepared, as we would for any test
match over the last 10 days since the announcement came. We're looking forward
to getting out on Saturday and I'm going to talk against England. In the city,
the 100 share index ended the day down 47 points at £7,931. On Wall Street a
short time ago, the Dow Jones was up 113 points at £33,243. On the currency
markets, the pound is trading at $1.20 and against the Euro, sterling is at
€1.13 and that makes a Euro worth 88 pence. The American chain Starbucks has
unveiled plans to add a Mediterranean twist to its coffee. They're launching a
series of drinks infused with olive oil, including a cafe latte, which it boasts
has a velvety smooth texture. It's being launched in Italy, but UK chains will
serve the new blend later this year. The idea isn't to the taste of some
traditionalists, including Antonio Puedri, who owns an independent Italian
coffee bar in central London. How can they even think about their intuition in
teaching Italians about coffee? I've got a business that's been running in this
street for 75 years next year and it's successful. I'm not going to tinker with
it. If people want olive oil, they can come and have olive oil, but to start
adding it to coffee, where will it end? With 10 weeks to go until the
coronation, the race is on to recruit and train more bell ringers to mark the
big day in May. The central council of church bell ringers says it wants to ring
every bell in the country for an event it's calling Ring for the King. It
estimates there are around 30 to 40,000 companologists in the UK, but 8,000 more
are needed. Our correspondent Joe Black sent this report. On the waterfront are
tips which the bells at the church of St Clement ring out. It's a deconsecrated
church and this isn't the weekly service, it's a training session. Balance to
balance, so when we ring rounds in a minute, you can control, that's it. Now
control the backstroke. Most of the new recruits have answered the call to Ring
for the King, a recent appeal by the Campanology community to get more people
interested in acquiring this skill. Among them, Freya, a 17-year-old A-level
student who has been ringing since November and says being involved on
coronation weekend will be something to remember. It's like being something I've
been interested in, but I suppose Ring for the King made me think this is the
time to get into it. All yours. Amanda Richmond from the Association of Ringing
Teachers is guiding the new members and is pleased with their progress. We want
to make sure that there are ringers for every church so that we can all ring out
the ring for the King, for the coronation. In some areas of the country, bell
ringing is thriving. Those here at St Paul's in Birmingham are aged between 11
and 80 years old and their bell ringing school is full. But in other places,
there can be very few. Simon Linford is from the Central Council of Church Bell
Ringers. We probably had a couple of decades of not really realising that the
ringing community was getting older and failing to replace ourselves, but now
we're actively looking to replace ourselves. It takes around 10 to 12 hours of
one-to-one tuition to get a basic level of ringing. Still time to learn ahead of
May the 6th. The headlines again. Tesco and Aldi have become the latest
supermarkets to introduce limits on the sale of some fruit and vegetables. But
our main story is that Shaimima Begum, who travelled to Syria as a schoolgirl to
join the Islamic State Group, has lost her appeal against the government's
decision to revoke her British citizenship. Josh Baker is one of the makers of
the BBC documentary and podcast The Shaimima Begum Story. He has this
assessment. There's no doubt that Shaimima Begum will be disappointed. She's
repeatedly told me that she wants to return to the UK to have her day in court.
She describes the Syrian detention camp she now lives in as a kind of purgatory
for her. Today's judgement is about the woman who walked out of the ashes of the
so-called caliphate in 2019, who appeared unrepentant and was deemed a threat to
national security. But when I talk to her now, it often feels like I'm speaking
to three different people. There's the naive teenager who took 30 bars of her
favourite mint chocolate to a war zone. There's the close-minded IS member who
spent her formative years with the terror group. And there's the woman who spent
years reflecting on the decisions of her younger self, having lost three
children and now living in a detention camp. She's repeatedly told me that she
regrets joining IS. What would you say to your 15-year-old self now? Don't do
it, bitch. Just don't do it. Really? Yeah, that's all I would say. She wouldn't
believe me anyway. She would not have listened to me. She'd have still decided
to go. Probably, yeah. She was too arrogant at that time. So for now, her home
remains a camp on the edge of the desert, along with hundreds of women who were
linked to IS as well as their children. Josh Baker. BBC News. The newsreader
this evening was Alan Smith. Conversations from a Long Marriage is our comedy
next, Joanna Lumley and Roger Allamstar as the long-married couples still
passionate about life and each other. That's just after we hear about the return
of someone else with a zest for everyday life. The master of satire David
Sederis is back with his unique blend of wit and wisdom. I know that people are
now taking pictures of themselves at funerals because when I looked up selfies
at funerals was the third option. The humorous laughs at life and himself. I've
been studying Japanese and I'll say something to Hugh. I'll say, oh, did you
know that this is how you say? And he says, we're only going for four days. A
new series of Meet David Sederis starts tomorrow evening at 6.30 on Radio 4 and
BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4 Joanna is called upon to give some marital advice.
Conversations from a Long Marriage by Jan Etherington. Starring Joanna Lumley
and Roger Allamstar. Too many broken hearts have fallen in the river. Too many
lonely stars have drifted out to sea. Episode two, Let It Go. What are you doing
up there? Cleaning my teeth. Not funny. Get down now. Unfinished yet? Tough.
Good grief. I only went out for a loaf and I come back to find you dangling like
a stuntman. I am not dangling. I'm adjusting the satellite dish to get a better
signal. You don't know how to do that. Al said it was easy. Al's an engineer.
Why do you always think I don't know what I'm doing? I don't always think that.
Except in this case I do. It's not safe up there. And look, Amy's running
around. She could knock you over. Who let her out? She came out with me because
I was looking for you. I didn't know you were up the extension ladder. Could you
take her in please and leave me alone to complete my task? I'm not leaving.
Look, we agreed that you wouldn't go up the big ladder again. I was just inches
away from a clean getaway. What does that mean? Just a Jack Nicholson line that
says it all. If you hadn't come back when you did... I could have found you
splattered on the terrace. Oh, might as well unblock the gutters while I'm up
here. No! You don't need to. Shane does that when he does the windows. My
emasculation is complete. Am I really considered incapable of flicking leaves
out of my own guttering? It's not that simple. Some things are best left to
those who do it for a living and... I've got a crick in my neck looking up at
your feet. Come down now. Ah, Verity and Jonah have finally got their garden
kitchen installed. I know. Very smart. All wood. I'm just trying to check out
what the oven's like. Don't lean! Get down this minute. All right. But don't
blame me if the signal's still poor. I don't care. Take it very slowly. Oh,
Crips, I feel as if I'm talking you down from a cliff door. Don't grab me. I
won't. Oh, my God, darling. I said don't grab me. Oh, I couldn't resist.
Actually, I'm quite relieved. It's a bit scary up there and I need a pee. I bet
that's what Tom Cruise says when he's been up in a plane filming Top Gun. Need
another ice pack? No, thanks. The pain's easing off. You really are completely
crazy. That big ladder weighs a ton. I know. I shouldn't have done it. I'm just
so cross with the signal we're getting or not getting. Yes, I can see it's very
blurry. What are you watching? An old edition of Top of the Pops, so I guess
that's bound to be fuzzy. Yeah? 1968. Oh, gosh. That was the start of us. It
was. You all right? If you knew back then what you know now, would you still
have married me? I'm banning you from drinking Reoca midweek. I'm serious, would
you? Absolutely not, because I'd know you'd still be asking the same daft
questions 50 years later. I've just been talking to Celia. So how are they? It's
a bit of a sad house, because she just told me that Jules has discovered she
can't have children. Isn't Jules about to get married? Mm-hmm. But she went to
the doctors and had lots of tests, discovered she's having an early menopause.
She's only 20-something. Twenty-four. Celia's very upset about it. Of course.
Only child, no grandchildren. Although your mother wasn't that bothered, I seem
to remember. She was the only one who was delighted we didn't have children. She
hated the thought of becoming a granny. But I didn't think Celia's even thinking
about that. She's just devastated for Jules. Does Jules want children? Well,
probably not immediately, but Ethan comes from a big family and... It's having
the choice taken away. Why has it happened to her? It's not really clear. It
seems her ovaries just packed up. Maybe they can restart them? They're not spark
plugs. Well, that is very unfortunate, but... Celia wants me to talk to her
about what it's like not having children. Crikey! Do you really think you can do
that? I can try. I am her godmother. I don't think that's necessarily one of
your duties. But I must help if I can. Does Ethan know? Not yet. She's only just
found out herself. She's scared to tell him. Ah. That's why you were asking me
what if I'd known then. Yeah. Maybe I should talk to Ethan. Oh, that might be a
very good idea. Do you think you could, darling? Sorry. I was just thinking
about the day we found out. Beautiful sunny morning. We walked out of the
hospital like zombies. You were clutching my hand so tightly. It was one of
those times when it feels like you're in a swimming pool and all sound is
distorted and echoey. I don't know why we decided to walk across the park.
Because it was on the way back to the station. But we seemed to be weaving our
way through a blockade of prams and pushchairs. And then you picked up a toddler
who'd fallen off his tricycle right in front of us. Yes. You could pick up
strange children in those days without getting arrested. The mother came up and
thanked us. And she had a new baby in her arms. And she said, it's not easy with
two, as I'm sure you'll find out one day. And we laughed. And then we turned
away. You cried. She wasn't to know. I've crossed with myself and it's still so
painful. Right. I don't think you should do it. It's too much to ask. I feel I
can't say no. I'm just not sure what I can say that would be of use. Would you
like to run your thoughts past me before you talk to her? That might help. A
lot. But do you really want to go back there? Might be easier if we go back
together. Thank you, darling. Let me top you up first. You said you were going
to ban me from drinking midweek. I'd pretend you'd have listened. Oh, my God,
Sal, a month! Well, I'm not surprised. Does he know how you feel? Of course he
would be thrilled. But unbelievably tough for you. Honestly, I don't know what
to suggest, except, I don't know, sign up for a singles tracking holiday through
the Australian Outback. Look, I'm just going to take the jog out. I'll swing by
and we can talk about it properly. Twenty minutes? OK. Bye. Come on, Amy.
Walkies. Darling. What? Don't what me? OK. What? Who was it who said 95% of
married life is shouting what from room to room? James Watt and his immediate
family. And the other 5% of marriages hearing your partner say doesn't matter.
For God's sake, I'm busy. What do you want? Stop snapping at me. I don't like
it. Sorry, but I'm on the phone trying to get some sense out of Yap Yap or
whatever they call themselves these days. And I've been listening to Vangelis
for weeks. I thought the TV was OK now. Is it still pixelating? No. I'm just
phoning them for a chat about the price of fish. Of course it is. What's really
frustrating is someone did answer about 40 minutes ago and took the details and
then silent. And now I'm being held in a queue and my call is important to them.
Liars. I need a pee. Here. Can you hold the phone for a minute? Well, I'm taking
the dog out, going to Sal's. I'll be in and out quicker than a penguin down a
water slide. Anyway, they went out to talk Thursday. Do not do the crossword in
there. I know you put it on the shelf. Come straight back. All right. Don't cut
yourself off by mistake. Yeah, right. Do do do do do. Baboo boo boo. Sorry about
this, Amy. Slight delay. Just sit down. Sit. Sit. Thank you, Goldie. Good girl.
I'm sorry. Oh, er, hello. Um, yes, we have a problem with our TV reception. My
husband has already given you those details. Do you? Hang on. He's got the
account number and the paperwork with him. He's just in the, um, just two
seconds. Darling. What? He won't be a minute. Are you still there? Hello? Oh,
hell, farts and utter bums. Argh! What? Doesn't matter. Oh, I need a pint of
water quick. You look completely wiped out. You should see the other guy. Thank
God I had a puncture so I could stop for five minutes. Peter, annoyingly, took
the break as an excuse to do some lunges and squats. You should tell him it's
too much for you. It's not. Let me get my breath back. I have big news. Peter's
son, Joe, is staying with them for a whole month. How do you know? Sally told
me. And I'd have told you yesterday if I'd been speaking to you, which I wasn't.
He's thrilled. Sally isn't? Really? He never said. He wouldn't, because he
doesn't know or doesn't care how Sally feels. I mean, what he wants has always
been his default position, which is how he got a son in the first place. What
did Sally say then? Look, could you peel off your light dress somewhere else?
Well, don't you find it a bit of a turn on when things pop out? Flop out? Oh,
I'm just so hot. I've got to get everything off quickly. Isn't that the opening
line of Debbie Does Dallas? How would I know? Yes, Sally is upset. No change
there, then. Because? That's quite a complicated answer, really, which I can't
formulate while I'm staring at Bradley Wiggins' dad doing a strict tease. Free
at last. I don't think I could ever take up diving or skiing. I'm not a fan of
constricting clothing. Is that my bathrobe? Get... Oh, come on. I need it for my
modesty. No, you're all sweaty. It's freshly washed. But if I stand around with
nothing on, there's a danger you'll find me impossible to resist. No, I'm taking
it upstairs. Let's take it upstairs together, babe. Oh, for goodness sake, have
it. Ah, thank you. Oh, it's lovely and warm. It's just out of the tumble dryer.
Room inside for two. Oh, jeepers. Who knew an electric bike was a marital aid?
I'm going to chug a bucket of water over you. Tempting. But let's have a cup of
tea first and we'll see where the evening takes us. I tell you where it's going
to take us if you'll stop pratting about. Out for a pizza with Diane Owl. So
you'd better have a nap first. Tell me about Sally. That'll send me to sleep.
That's not very nice. She's pretty cheesed off with Peter because he's told
Kirsty he'll have Jo to stay without discussing it with her at all. And she's
not keen on the idea? But of course she's not. Jo's a constant reminder of
Peter's affair and almost marriage to Kirsty. Yes, I can see it's tougher, huh?
Well, it's more than tough. Sally's been remarkably tolerant. No, she hasn't.
She's been a raging varago. Well, maybe not tolerant, but outwardly sanguine
about it all. She's had Jo for weekends, even Christmas, but she never ever
wanted children of her own. And taking on someone else's five-year-old for weeks
on end is not what she fancies doing as a senior rail card holder. And yes,
those were her exact words, seasoned with a few ripe curses. I remember she was
very anti-motherhood, even as a teenager. I don't think Peter might. It either
were when they were young. But since Jo came along, he's realised how wonderful
it can be having a child. So it's a dilemma for her. She'd say no and risk
Peter's disappointment. Or let Jo come to stay and put up with it. Look at me.
It's upset you, hasn't it? Come inside my fluffy robe. No, you're whiffy. Oh,
contraire, this smells of fragrant laundry sheets. It's a wonderful irony, isn't
it? Sally can't stand the idea of having a child around. Whereas... I think it's
more about whose child it is. No, no, she really doesn't like kids. He'll
probably sense that. He's old enough now. Sally won't pay the wicked. What is
she? Not a stepmother? No, because she was there first. There's no word for it,
really. Anyway, I said we'd have Jo for a few days. What? Give Sally a break.
He's very active. Oh, bugger. And you are his godfather. Honorary godfather,
appointed just after my knee replacement. I think Peter expects me to be the one
steering him towards the beat poets Joni Mitchell and Sinema Verite. Not having
a kickabout on the common. He's got a couple of twenty-something godparents for
that. Tough. I've told her we would. So you'd better start practicing your
flying tackles. Ooh! Ooh! Obviously not on me. Oh, that's definitely a red card.
Oh, me close, don't let me go. Oh, no. I, yes, I love you and I think that you
know, that you know, if you look like Chinese, every cloud's got its groove
and... Ah! What? When I lift my arm up like this, it hurts. Well, don't do it
then. All across my back, it aches. You've just broken my concentration. I'm
making some notes for jewels. Oh, I'm sorry if I'm standing here inconveniently
in agony. Okay. Did you go round to Jenny's yesterday with the power hose? I
did. Sluiced out all the muck and mouse droppings. You could eat off her garage
floor now. And has she got a basketball hoop on the back wall for the teenagers?
Let me think. You had a go, didn't you? For about half an hour? Well, I had to
beat Jenny, didn't I? But you didn't beat her. She was laughing when she told
me, you just wouldn't give up. I'm going to have no private life at all. Not in
the street now. I'm getting old and creaky, aren't I? Undoubtedly. That makes me
a bit sad. Do you think I've still got a vigorous walk? Bit of a swagger? Yes.
Look, can we talk about your insecurities later? I need to finish these thoughts
because I'm going to see jewels tomorrow. Oh, okay. Sorry. Why don't you take
Sally with you, give the alternative view? I think that would be
counterproductive. Rose wants a family, but Sally never did. She even refused to
babysit for her friends. Remember when we all went round to Paulers and she gave
Sally the baby to hold and Sally handed it back and said, babies are not my
thing. Never knowingly sensitive. She was treated like a freak because she was
adamant she didn't ever want to be a mother. She used to bang on about
overpopulating the planet even then. And that just wasn't fashionable in the
60s. Everyone thought you got married because you were planning to have kids.
And that's what we wanted until we found out we couldn't. So what have you said
in your notes for jewels? I've had to be honest and tell her it'll feel like the
end of your world because it did to me. Never quite gone away, has it? I think
it's heightened because I'm talking about it at the moment and it's bringing
back that feeling of isolation when all our friends are flaunting babies and in
the club. I remember very intrusive questions. I've slept with you two, not
doing it enough as if. People just don't think they're deliriously happy with a
new baby. They obviously believe you could pop one out just as easily. All those
temperature charts, sex by appointment, before we discovered we were wasting our
time. It was all my fault. No. Because of that terrible miscarriage. It broke us
apart. But we put ourselves back together again. Time passed. Yeah. But then you
get a different question along the same lines. How many grandchildren have you
got? Not always. People are more likely to whip out a photo of their Labrador
than their grandchild. Which reminds me, I took this pic when Amy was confused
by a tortoise at Jenny's yesterday. Cute, eh? I don't know what those flying
rats are eating but it's purple. The blackberries, obviously. This can't go on.
It's ruining the paintwork. I'm going to sprinkle some Imodium on the blackberry
bush. That's a bad idea. We eat the blackberries too. Collateral damage. What
the world needs now is more constipated pigeons. Did you clean it all off? For
now. But it's farting against thunder. They're all sitting in the tree, wings on
hips, waiting for me to go inside and then it's all right lads, he's bugging
off. Back to today's mission. See if you can hit the wing mirror, Percy. And aim
for the door handle, Morris. Morris? Shall I make us a sandwich? Oh, Sally's put
her foot down. On what? She says she's only letting Joe stay for ten days. If
Peter wants to be with him for any longer, he can. And I quote, Bloody well take
him off to Disneyland, Legoland or any of the other lands where lone fathers
desperately try to bond with the children they hardly know. What did Peter say?
She hasn't told him yet. Then we'd better make up the Ben and the Spear Room.
One of them will storm out tonight and end up here. Sally's not going to give
any ground. I put my money on Peter. And I'll get out the blue sheets. Oh,
gender stereotyper. You're going to put Action Man on the pillow. He's not
having my Action Man. Do men ever entirely grow up? I think you know the answer
to that one. I'll get the sheets out while you make us a sandwich. I can sort
Peter's bedding out later. I thought you were going to see Jules tonight. Well,
funny thing. Celia phoned and apologised for asking me to talk to Jules. She
said she was just so concerned about her and she was trying to think of someone
who would know how it felt to be told you could never have children. That's
exactly what I said must have happened. And now she realises how painful it must
be for me, recalling that time in my life, and she wouldn't want to put me
through it. Good. I'm glad she phoned you. Hey, is this anything to do with you?
What do you mean? Did you talk to her and tell her I was upset? I'm not that
sensitive. You are, sometimes, quite often. It wouldn't be surprising if you had
said something, because I know you're worried about me and you always like to
fix things. Well, it's fixed itself. You don't have to do it. Of course I do.
So, you're still going to meet Jules? Look, the truth is, it was a long time ago
for me, but it's very fresh and raw for Jules, and of course I must talk to her.
OK. You really want to do this? I do. She's actually coming here tomorrow now.
She wants to see the dog. Oh, it's from Peter. We haven't made the bed up yet.
He wants me to meet him for a drink and tell him what to do. They've had a row
and Sally's on her way round here. Sally? It's the pink sheets, then. MUSIC
MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC
MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC Morning, honey, I'm home.
MUSIC MUSIC Oh, totally run out. Mmm. Oh, you could do with a shower. Did you
sleep at all? We talked for most of the night. At about 2am, I thought I might
as well stay in the house with him as Sally's obviously not coming back. I did
send you a text late last night. I know, I read it when I woke up for a pee. So
what's happening now? Peter's gone off to pick up Joe. Did you give him any
advice? Mostly, I just let him talk, though I did say, don't upset Sally. Is she
still in bed? No, she's taken the dog out with Jules. Jules is here already?
Yes, she came really early. And of course Sally was staying, so the three of us
had quite a long chat. I'm about to make brunch while they take Amy to the
common. How'd it go? Presumably Sally's been telling Jules she would be better
off without kids. Well, initially she did, but she was very sympathetic and
disgusted and a surprisingly sensitive, practical and quite funny way. You know
Sally, the world is overrun with ankle biters, so I'm glad she was here. Told
her she'd be useful. Jules was very positive as well. She's talked about it to
Ethan and he was extremely understanding and said he only wants her and really
isn't at all bothered about having children. Sounds like she's got one of the
good guys. It does, doesn't it? He's only concerned for her like you were for
me. One of us had to try and stay strong. And you did, most of the time. And
definitely when it mattered. Thank you. Do you think Jules has got over the
initial shot? Well, they're making plans to travel quite extensively, go to
Australia for a year or two and then see how they feel. Ethan is quite happy to
adopt if she wants to be her mother. You didn't want to do that? No, I didn't.
Sometimes I wish we had. I suppose I just wanted our baby or nothing. I couldn't
help it, but that's how I felt. We felt. Good news is lots of her friends
apparently don't want children either. One of them sent her a link to the non-
mums network. How fantastic that she's got a supportive gang of friends. You
know, Jules said something lovely to me about how she could see I'm having such
a wonderful, happy, fulfilled life. Who with? Ah, yeah, funny. She can see the
love we have between us and she envies that and wants that for her marriage. And
she realises when she looks at us that you don't have to have children to have a
happy married life. At which point I'm guessing Sally chipped in with here,
here. She did exactly that. But the important thing I wanted to say to Jules is
that I believe I'm the lucky one. I have the most important thing, a lifelong
love affair with my husband, uncomplicated by having to share that love with
hordes of children. Also, they'll have much more disposable income because kids
are so bloody expensive. I'll tell Ethan that. Next time I'm marrying an
incurable romantic. Traffic is crazy. Wish I'd taken a bike. You can't get a
pack of nine loo rolls on a bike. Ah, I knew I'd forgot something. Hilarious.
The suit will be ready on Tuesday. Where shall I put the ticket? Give it to me.
You'll lose it. Hope you'd say that. Did you have a sandwich in town? No,
ridiculous cue at the deli. I'm starving. Fancy and omelette? Lovely. Ham and
tomato, bacon and mushroom, cheese and onion. All of the above. You make the
coffee. Well, dear. How's your day been so far? Interrupted. Sally's just been
on the phone sobbing. Bloody Nora. Shall I get the pink sheets out again? No
need. Joe's only been there five minutes. It can't have gone wrong already, but
it has, has it? Quite the opposite. When Joe came through the door with Peter
yesterday, he was clutching a big card that he'd drawn himself. He gave it to
Sally and it was a picture of her and Peter with him in the middle holding their
hand and it said, to my other mummy, kiss, kiss. Oh, he's obviously heading for
a career in the diplomatic service. As soon as she looked at it, she started
crying. But that was because she said it was such an unflattering likeness.
Apparently it had drawn her with crossed eyes. Her hair was orange and grey
spikes. Her legs were like bloody tree stamps, darling. I hope she didn't ask
him to do it again. Not even Sally would do that. She gave him a hug and a mini
magnum and now they're all going to Disneyland Paris next week. You're joking. I
know. Who would have thought it? Oh, more good news. TV's fixed. I thought he
was coming tomorrow. Well, he had a cancellation and called in on the off
chance. Oh, but I wanted to be here, make sure it was sorted. Don't panic, it
is. Young guy whizzed up the ladder. Fortunately, he was very agile. And you get
out of deck chair to keep an eye on his progress. Oh, he was no dark coke man,
rather skinny and hunched with a buzz cut. You look much sexier up the ladder.
Your hair blowing in the wind, letting off a string of expletives. Clinging on
for dear life. All good news then, especially for Sally. I suppose so. It's
just, I can't quite work out where the idea for the card came from. Joe's too
young to know how to navigate the emotional minefield of shared parenthood. And
Kirsty wouldn't have got him to do it. She's completely indifferent to Sally's
feelings. Peter would never come up with that idea on his own in a million years
either. He might have done. Did he mention it when he was with you? He didn't.
No, not at all. But you did? How do you get to that? I bet you did, didn't you?
He asked for your advice about how to make Sally more welcoming to Joe. Yes,
that was the reason why we were talking all night. And? And OK. I might have run
it up the flagpole, along with naming a star after Sally to buying her a
goldfish. Hey! Oh, I do it. I love you. You are the most kind and wonderful
person. Oof! I really, really love you. Right. Now we've established that. What
happened to the omelette? Oh! HE LAUGHS And now the marriage round is very
sacred. The man is put us together now. You ought to make it stick together.
Come on, come on, let's stick together. Conversations from a Long Marriage. Was
written by Jan Etherington. It starred Joanna Lumley. And Roger Allen. It was
produced and directed by Claire Jones. And was a BBC Studios production. But now
you never miss your water till you're well-read by me. Come on up, baby, give
our love a try. It's stick together. Come on. And you can join Joanna and Roger
again at the same time next week when they find themselves all at sea. Well,
back to this evening and we'll of course be finding ourselves in Ambridge next,
where Linda is about to up the ante in this evening's archers. And on front row
at a quarter past seven, the actor Nathaniel Martello White will be telling Nick
Ihad about his directing debut with the psychological thriller The Strays. Front
row is live here on radio four in just over 15 minutes. BBC Sounds. We are
making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third party
services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.