TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Rishi Sunak, it'll be on BBC Sound soon. That's it. Bye-bye. BBC News at nine
o'clock. Rishi Sunak is visiting Northern Ireland after reaching a new deal with
the EU over post-Brexit trading arrangements. The leader of the Democratic
Unionist Party, Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, has issued a cautious welcome to the so-
called Windsor Framework, but said he and his colleagues would study the legal
text before deciding whether to support it. Speaking on the Today programme, the
Prime Minister described the deal as a huge step forward for Northern Ireland.
I've spent a lot of time listening to unionist communities from Northern
Ireland, and indeed all parties that I've engaged with, because this is about
everybody, and I have taken the time to understand their concerns. I'm confident
that the Windsor Framework addresses those concerns, but I also respect that
everybody, including unionist representatives of all parties, will need the time
and the space to consider the detail. Police are urgently searching for a baby
belonging to a couple arrested in Brighton last night after they disappeared for
several weeks. Officers had been looking for Constance Martin and Mark Gordon
since their car broke down in Greater Manchester at the start of January. Their
child is yet to be found. Days of strike action by teachers across the UK start
today as part of an ongoing row over pay. Members of the National Education
Union are walking out in large parts of Northern England, along with teachers in
the Educational Institute of Scotland. Other parts of England and Wales will be
affected over the next two days. Experts have warned that government efforts to
make air travel net zero by 2050 are under threat due to a lack of viable
alternatives to jet fuel. A report by the Royal Society concluded that none of
the four main greener options currently available would be able to replace the
jet fuel used in the UK. Westminster's cricketers have lost the second test in
New Zealand by just one run. They started the final day chasing a target of 258
to win, which would have been a record after enforcing the follow-on. But the
home side bowled England out for 256. BBC News. And over on BBC5 Live Now, Nicky
Campbell is taking calls on that new deal between the EU and the UK and asking,
is Brexit done at last? Over on BBC Radio 4, as politicians in Westminster,
Stormont and Brussels grapple with the staggering complexities of trade and
peace in Northern Ireland, we'll be visiting one of the most potent symbols of
the Troubles, the Milltown Cemetery in West Belfast, where numerous prominent
Republicans are buried, Bobby Sands among them, and which was the scene of those
horrific murders carried out by the loyalist Michael Stone back in 1988. Author
Peter Ross pays a visit and explores what the place says about sacrifice,
martyrdom, conflict and peace. That's in A Tomb with a View at 9.45. But now
it's time for The Life Scientific. Here's Jim Al-Khalili. My guest today is a
man whose area of expertise has been in exceptionally high demand in recent
years. How do our immune systems defeat viruses? In particular, how do those
killer T cells, a type of white blood cell that searches for and destroys
infected cells, know when to launch an attack? Danny Altman became interested in
immunology when he was at university and has spent most of his career trying to
answer one question. How do our killer T cells know if a cell has been infected?
He studies the genetic basis of our immune response to a vast range of
pathogens, from anthrax to the Zika virus. And yes, when Covid hit, he turned
his attention to SARS-CoV-2. His lab at Imperial College London remained open
throughout the pandemic, and Danny was a regular on radio, TV and social media,
helping us all to understand the workings of our immune systems a little better.
He's one of many scientists who have helped us to understand how our immune
systems were responding to the threat posed by Covid, and is also one of a much
smaller group of scientists who have been studying long Covid. Why do some
people suffer debilitating consequences for so long after they've been infected?
Professor Danny Altman, welcome to Life Scientific. Thank you very much. Now, as
I just mentioned, your expertise has been in exceptionally high demand recently.
We all like to be useful, if we can, particularly as scientists, but has it felt
like a huge responsibility for you these past few years? I think the build-up to
it was very strange because, you know, as scientists, we exist in our own silos,
and really we've spent decades building up this knowledge and thinking and
thinking and thinking about how T-cells recognise things and how one could
design vaccines, and when the heat is on and all that knowledge got stress-
tested, it kind of paid off and meant something, and that does feel meaningful
and good. And looking back of your career today, we do know so much more about
T-cells now and how they work than we did back in the 80s. Do you think research
in this area can continue to progress at such a rapid rate? Totally, totally.
You know, immunology, the field I'm in, has delivered and delivered over the
last few decades, and I see that continuing. You know, there are plenty of
autoimmune diseases that we don't deal with well enough, plenty of infectious
diseases that we don't vaccinate against well enough, plenty of cancers that are
still too inaccessible, and all of those things are up for grabs. OK, Danny
Altman, before we delve into the intricacies of the immune system, I'd like to
get to know you a little bit more. You grew up in North London in the 60s and
had quite a sheltered childhood, I believe. Yeah, you know, I guess we all have
strange childhoods, don't we? But mine was, my parents were Holocaust survivors
in North West London, so, you know, a very kind of sheltered house where
everybody we knew came from similar kind of backgrounds, you know, very much the
kind of family where, you know, you ate Wiener schnitzel and apple strudel, not
roast beef in Yorkshire. Because, say, your parents came over when they were
young, your father came over on the Kindertransport when he was just nine years
old. He was on the Kindertransport as a nine-year-old, having lost his parents,
and my mother on liberation from Auschwitz. So, you know, quite an unusual
family in a way. Yeah, and how aware were you about that traumatic past that
your parents had experienced? In some ways, you know, it was everywhere,
because, you know, it was their past and their story and our family's story, and
these photos and paintings on the wall of relatives who I'd never known who had
this kind of sort of mythical property, because I didn't know any of my
grandparents. And on the other hand, you know, we just kind of got on with it,
didn't we? Yes, that's the life, you know. But did you feel any sense of maybe
of pressure to make the most, for example, of educational opportunities that
maybe had been denied your parents? Yes, in some ways. First of all, you know, I
think lurking in the background, there was a certain sort of element of
bitterness is probably too strong a word, but some kind of loss in my parents
that my mother had wanted to study, my father had wanted to study. Years later,
when I went through his papers after he died a few years back, I found a sad
little note from his social worker saying, the British taxpayer has invested
quite enough money in Hans's education, and I suggest he not be allowed to stay
at school beyond 16. And he was a very bright man, and that was very hard for
him. So, yes, a little bit that, you know, when I think about all those lives
that were ended and dreams that were crushed, I did sort of feel like you've got
to kind of go out there and just do something. And how about your mother? I
mean, you say she survived Auschwitz. Well, again, you know, a very bright lady
who'd missed her entire education. Of course. None whatsoever. Yeah. But for
them, it was kind of double-edged, yes? So on the one hand, obviously that kind
of Jewish pride, and on the other hand, slight kind of befuddled bemusement,
like what is it he does? What's his job? So academically, you were successful.
What did you study at university? So initially, I studied basic science. I
became a biochemist, but very early on, loved immunology. The turning point for
me was, you know, probably I was aged, God, 19? And a friend said, this chap,
Rolf Zinkernagel, is coming to speak in London. He'd gone to win the Nobel Prize
10 years later for describing these things called T-cells and how they recognise
infection. And so we decided to go and hear him. And really from that moment on,
I was kind of on Team T-cells. T-cells, this is the type of white blood cell
that swings into action when we get infected, circulating our bloodstream,
seeking out and destroying infected cells. I mean, how much was known back then
when you attended that lecture? Rolf Zinkernagel was starting to unravel it, but
it was kind of a mystery. So I guess after the pandemic, I think lots of people
became experts in antibodies and have it on board that antibodies float around
in your blood and recognise proteins like spike, which shouldn't be there. And
T-cells are the other half of the immune system, and to my mind, much kind of
cleverer. And in those days, it was a complete mystery what they recognised or
how they did it. And that was the kind of steep learning curve of those years.
And was it the mystery, the fact that we didn't understand them, that really
excited you? Yes, totally. You know, this was a fast-moving field, and people
would stand up at conferences and have big rows about it, about their different
models and different understanding. And it was before the days that molecular
biology had really kicked in. So we had the ideas, but we didn't really have the
toolkit to address them. So, you know, a lot of outrage, a lot of hand-waving, a
lot of disputes, a lot of philosophising until the tools came on board. Well, on
graduating in 1980, you went off to Bristol University to do a PhD precisely on
how T-cells control a particular disease, the herpes virus, after which you were
awarded a fellowship to work at the Weizmann Institute in Israel. This was in
the mid-80s, when papers on T-cells were coming out thick and fast. Did it feel
exciting to be working in such a fast-moving field? It felt terribly exciting.
It was great stuff. And by the mid-1980s, I'd come back to London to what was
then Imperial Cancer Research Fund. And that's the time when immunology really
entered a new age, because molecular biology came in. We could stop hand-waving
and drawing bubble diagrams and cartoons and actually clone things and sequence
things and be serious scientists like everybody else and work out what our
pathways were. So from the time that I was a postdoc, a big driver was to
understand these things called HLA molecules. So to rewind a little bit, the HLA
molecules are the genes that we have. They're terribly variable between people,
but we're all different in our HLA molecules. And the way that I was thought
about them historically is there are immune response genes. And this
communication between these HLA molecules and the T-cells, telling them this is
the real focus of your research, isn't it? It's the focus of my research has
been very boringly for my entire life. You know, I feel like school friends of
mine and college friends pursued exciting careers where they went here, there
and everywhere and changed directions. I've kind of worked on the same molecules
for my entire life and adored it and had great fun. But also, thank goodness for
the rest of us. So I mean, basically, so the T-cells are these killer drones
floating around, seeking out and destroying these infected cells. The HLA
molecules encoded by these genes, they are the military intelligence. They tell
the T-cells what to do. Exactly that. They're sitting on the surface of your
white blood cells. They're sampling the environment all the time, binding little
bits of protein into their groove. And based on the intelligence of what's in
that groove, they're saying, oh, you're OK. You're just a normal bit of skin
sequence. You're a normal bit of muscle sequence. You're not OK. You're a bit of
an Ebola virus sequence. So let me get this straight. All the cells that make up
our body tissue, so skin, muscle, organs and so on, have this molecule on the
outer surface that raises a flag, and it's telling the T-cells who are ready to
attack, yep, come and get my cell, it's infected. Yeah, good way of putting it.
So they're sampling the environment all the time. Most of the stuff, quite
innocuous, don't respond to it. Don't say we're infected. Don't raise the alarm.
And then suddenly there's a bit of COVID spike or something there, and they're
saying, come and get this. Right. And they're also telling them what the cell is
infected with. They're saying what the cell is infected with. And lots of
intelligent information going into the T-cell. What kind of response do we need?
How angry do you need to be? What kind of chemicals do you need to make? You
know, really intelligent communication. It's military communication. We sort of
endowed these cells and molecules with some sort of sentient intelligence, but
it is just really so clever. It's glorious. I mean, let me try you on a metaphor
that comes from my colleague, Benny, where he describes it like this to
students. He says, imagine that the government have decided that they're going
to monitor all the cars coming into London because they know that the baddies
tend to drive the red minis. The red cars are the viruses. In this analogy, yes.
The red cars are the viruses. And the baddies are quite sneaky. So sometimes
they'll put a spoiler on the mini or change its color or put different wing
mirrors on, and then it's harder to catch them. So that's why you need your
other bit of the immune system, the other half, which are the T-cells, which to
me are even more intelligent, because instead of just photographing the overall
shape of the minis, they're saying, well, if they try and sneak some different
version of it in, what we'll do is we'll crunch the minis down to its bare
components and look at its spark plugs and its door handles and its wing
mirrors, and that way we'll never be conned because we'll always know whether it
was the part of a red mini or not. And that's the T-cells recognizing bits of
viruses and bacteria. So even the most altered and souped up and pimped up red
mini will still have components that the T-cells will recognize. Totally. It's
gorgeous. You can't hide from us. I mean, it is incredible when you think about
it, just how many different viruses and bacteria the T-cells are able to
recognize and destroy. I think the point I try and get across is that to be a
mammal living on planet Earth is a really dangerous business. The chances of
survival are really, really poor. There are so many scary things around us, the
ones you know and the millions that you don't know, where as genomics gets
better and better, we're sequencing new viruses and fungi and bacteria all the
time. And to be a species living on planet Earth, you need a good immune system
that can deal with all of those. So the immune system is a really fantastically
complex beast and genetically very highly programmed to get us through that.
Many of us think quite a lot about our immune system and how to boost it through
lifestyle changes or diets or taking supplements. But perhaps we don't probably
quite appreciate just how different we all are in our ability to fight specific
diseases. Yes, I think so. Obviously, among the many, many questions I get asked
by journalists during the pandemic were certainly questions about lifestyle and
diet and supplements and things. And I guess at the end of the day, if I was
asked how to have a really good protective immune system, it would be pick the
right parents, ideally genetically diverse parents and be moderately well
nourished. And that's the best you can do. And then hope you've got the right
genes. So my ability to fight a particular disease is not going to be the same
as yours. Totally different. Right. Yeah, totally different. So, you know, one
of the things that I do when I teach students is I'll introduce the subject by
saying hands up if you know your star sign. And everybody will put their hands
up and shout out Capricorn, Gemini, whatever. And then I'll say hands up if you
know your HLA type. And nobody except for me in the room will put their hands
up. And it seems bonkers to me that you would think it was valuable in life to
know whether you were Virgo or Gemini and not know whether you were going to be
more prone to making a good or bad response to your Covid vaccine or more likely
or less likely to get MS. I mean, you know, surely that's quite important to
know. OK, so how then do I find out about mine? I know, for example, I've got a
blood condition, beta thalassemia, from one of my parents, Middle Eastern
background. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You know, which is down to a defective gene. How
do I find out what other diseases I may or may not be susceptible to? Well,
obviously, what you need to do is get your DNA sequenced. A kind of sneaky and
kind of communally useful way to do that would be to register as a bone marrow
donor, which is, you know, quite a sort of selfless, useful thing to do. And you
get to know your HLA type. Right. I'm on it. So, Danny, maybe you can explain
what you do all day in the lab. Well, nowadays, I probably don't do very much in
the lab that's useful. But I think one of the things that sometimes makes me
feel very old when I speak to PhD students today is that today their lives are
very technology driven and computer driven. And they will do an experiment that
may be cost 20,000 pounds worth of reagents and equipments. It generated 100,000
lines of data and they could essentially sit at home for the next month
analyzing it and decoding it and working out the big data. And then we could
write a paper about it together. When I was their age, we were we were manual
laborers. It was all about how many hours you could spend in the lab pouring
your gels, culturing your cells, pouring your sequencing plates. And it was very
common to work a 70, 80, 100 hour week because it was labor intensive manual
labor. Yes. Yeah. And I was spent looking down microscopes, looking down
microscopes. So it's one of my most common expressions in those days was you've
got to get your eye in. What did get your eye in mean? It meant get to know and
love your cells. How do they look? Are they happy? Are they unhappy? Are they
activated? Are they not activated? Are they responding? It was your life. So you
could actually look under the microscope and see T cells interacting with
infected cells? I can still close my eyes and see an angry activated T cell.
Yes. It's a kind of sort of bulging teardrop and sitting there ready to do all
its stuff. So it's battleground. It's warfare. It's great stuff. And when you
use words like it's warfare, it really is down at the molecular scale. It's
really exciting stuff. Yeah. Yeah. A lot of people think of us as scientists all
need to be good at maths and good at problem solving. But being good with words
is also very important, isn't it? I think there are there are many different
kinds of scientists. Yeah. And partly that's beautiful because it means you can
bring different things to the party. And partly it's kind of threatening because
it means you can never overcome your imposter syndrome, because there's always
somebody out there who's got a far bigger skill set than you have in something
or other. So in my case, it's the fact that I'm barely numerate and the others
in the room, you know, are doing crunching lines and lines of coding. Well, you
say you're barely numerate, but my producer tells me you're into 19th century
classics. So, yeah. So whatever I lack in numbers, I possibly make up for in
words. So for my entire adult life, my my mindfulness, if you like, has been to
read 19th century classics in the bath from 5 to 6 a.m. And every day, every
single day of my life. So, you know, so I'm apart from being good on HLA and T
cells, I'm pretty good on Tolstoy and Dostoevsky and Dickens and Hardy and
Trollope and things like that. And one of the things I do like about words and
narratives and things is, oh, you know, the idea that sometimes I think you just
have to ask a good question, do a good experiment and tell a good story about
what you found that's new. Yeah, I think that applies to all science. And even,
you know, you're solving difficult mathematical problems. If you can't explain
it, if you can't add the narrative that makes other people understand it, then,
you know, what's the point? I hope so. You know, I think I think it's important.
So it was it was drummed into me when I was at the Weizmann with with Irene
Cohen, who would sit with me writing papers over a bottle of malt whiskey. And
we'd fight over every adjective. And, you know, nowadays I sort of fight with
people over coding and pathways and computer algorithms and things. And in those
days, we'd fight with a copy of Rogers Thesaurus about, you know, which
adjective or adverb to use. And the idea was to try and write something
beautiful and compelling and interesting. And that seemed still seems kind of
fair to me. Yeah. You know, I have my favorite scientists and it's not just
their discoveries. It's because I love the way they write. Yeah. Yeah,
absolutely. Now, Danny, during this time in the 80s, when you're working full
time in the lab, 12 hour days and so on, you wrote a very important paper in
Nature in 1989. How big a moment was that for you? Well, I think for any
scientist, the first Nature paper moment is a big moment. Yeah. It's like
whatever it is, you know, getting your first BAFTA or Oscar or Booker Prize or
whatever it is. It suddenly means that you've done something right and people
have noticed you. And in that particular case, it was decoding some of the use
of these HLA molecules by being able to clone the genes and put them into cells
and show what they did and be a bit reductionist about it. And the telephone in
the lab starts ringing and people from other countries and other continents are
saying, you know, do you want to come and be interviewed for a tenure track
position or come and speak to us? And suddenly the job feels a bit exciting.
Yes. You've made it. You've made a big splash. A little bit for a few years. And
of course, that paper, the 1989 paper, you say the phone was ringing and
suddenly you were in demand. That then meant that you were traveling the world
talking to scientists. Yeah. You know, I think I think the joy of the job we do
is that you're part of this international community and I can pick up the phone
or the email or go on a plane to friends and colleagues in countries in every
continent of the world. And we share a world. And that's a that's a wonderful
thing about the job. It really is. And that's what's interesting about your
work, isn't it, Danny, that because you work on our immune response to all sorts
of diseases, you're not like, you know, there's a lot of scientists who will
specialise in Ebola or Zika for you or any infectious disease where pathogen
enters the body and our immune system has to develop a response to it. That's
that's your area. I think it's it's my focus, obviously, is these HLA and T cell
interactions. So that's been my driver all through my career. And yet I've
applied it to many, many different autoimmune diseases, cancers, infectious
diseases. And over the years, that's been something quite confusing to my
colleagues who thought perhaps I was a bit dilettante. You know, why is it, you
know, Altman one year he was really keen on anthrax and then a few years later
he was really keen on MS and then a few years after that he was keen on Zika
virus. What's the matter with him? And the answer is I was always thinking about
the same thing, how the T cells get turned on and what turns them on and what
they recognise. I was just applying it in different contexts, often in different
countries. Yeah. Presumably, if you try to understand a military intelligence
system, you need to test it out in all sorts of different battle environments.
Totally, totally. Yeah. Yeah. OK, so there you were travelling the world,
studying our immune response to all sorts of infectious diseases when bang, a
totally new virus arrives on the scene, SARS-CoV-2. Did you immediately drop
what you were doing to get to work on this or did you, like most of the rest of
us, just have this moment of confusion about, you know, just not knowing what to
do next? Yeah, well, you know, our lab, like all the labs at Imperial College,
we were closed down when lockdown happened. But you were allowed to gradually
reopen your labs if you worked on on Covid. So I run a lab with my wife,
Rosemary, who's also an immunologist and respiratory doctor. So it was very
natural territory for us that we would start to apply our toolkit to Covid and
start to build up some collaborations and start to do stuff on it. So we really
became a kind of seven days a week Covid lab, both working within the UK and
collaborating with lots of other countries that were having a very bad Covid
experience. Well, you've been working on Covid and in particular long Covid ever
since. When did you first realise that that long Covid might be a thing? Yeah,
so I do feel that long Covid is really important. And, you know, the idea that
there's a kind of persistent trail of disability that comes after your acute
Covid infection for perhaps 10% of everybody on planet Earth who's ever had
Covid, which is hundreds of millions of people. Yeah. And so it does feel like a
big deal to me. And it kind of came upon me quite early on. So if you think back
to what, March and April 2020, when people who had friends in England were
seeing their first ever cases or their first ever friends who were affected. And
I had friends talking to me, one of my best friends, saying there's something
weird here because, you know, I can hardly walk around the block anymore. And I
used to kind of go off on my bicycle and I can't anymore. What's going on? And
it did sound to me like a thing and a real thing. And it was immediately
slightly familiar to me in terms of consequences of viral infection, because
part of the day job immediately before Covid had been travelling to Brazil,
where we were rather keen on another virus called chikungunya. And so
chikungunya is one of the viruses you catch when mosquitoes nip you, a bit like
dengue or Zika or one of those things. But in the case of chikungunya, you get
your rash and your malaise and your fever. But then for quite a high proportion
of people, they won't recover. And for months or years afterwards, they have a
kind of almost autoimmune like arthritis. So it felt to me almost like one of
those kind of cases. Right. So, I mean, clearly certain viruses can have that
sort of long term effect. But when we think about long Covid, you say you really
believe there's something here. But are there medical colleagues of yours that
are still not convinced by long Covid that maybe they think your time is better
spent doing something else? Oh, totally. So I think there are people who think
that I'm sort of way off piste worrying about long Covid and spending a lot of
my research time working on long Covid and perhaps wonder, oh, you know, whether
it's psychological and whether people are having us on. And those kind of
attitudes worry me and make me angry because I do think this is an enormous
health care challenge. If it's as big as most of us think it is, then we've
created a medical problem for ourselves and a medical caseload as large again as
the whole of rheumatology or the whole of heart disease. That's going to have
enormous consequences for people's lives, for the workforce, for NHS spending,
doctor numbers, you know, you name it. So we're kind of obligated, I feel, to
take it seriously. Well, certainly, you know, if there are millions of people
who are ill for months and months and months after being infected, you know, we
have to. So you are probably best placed to be able to answer this. What do you
think is going on? So the picture that I'd paint at the moment, it's like a lot
of Covid, isn't it? We've worked so fast and discovered so much at pace that you
feel you know a lot. And yet it's kind of scattergun of sort of facts here or
there. So if you ask me to draw the textbook pathway, I'd be hard placed to do
it. So I recently wrote a book on long Covid with a patient called Jez Medinger,
and he's got a very good analogy for describing it. He says the state of
knowledge at the moment is you've got one of those thousand piece jigsaws and
you feel like you've done very well. But actually, you've put in place the easy
pieces around the edge and you know, you're bluffing about whether it's going to
look like a horse or a steam train, you don't really know yet. So we've got the
pieces around the edge. And at this stage, long Covid, it's sort of a catch all
for what could be many different things. It's an umbrella, almost certainly for
more than one thing, which includes clotting abnormalities and inflammatory
abnormalities and possibly autoimmunity and possibly viral persistence. The idea
that people might not quite clear their Covid. There's lots of ideas in there,
but hard to put them all together. So all similarish symptoms, but maybe
different causes. Yeah, yeah. And which of the causes do you think might be the
most likely that's leading to this persistence? Oh, well, I mean, to stick my
neck out before we finish the research and say which is most likely, it's trying
to guess the jigsaw puzzle before we build it. So, you know, all hypotheses on
the table. So the jigsaw puzzle still is far from complete. And I know this is
an impossible question to answer because scientific discoveries don't follow a
predictable path. They always surprise us. But is it ridiculous to think that
there might be some effective treatment that that jigsaw puzzle will start to
take form, say, in the next five, 10 years? Or at least there may be a
diagnostic test of some sort. Yeah, totally. So the people with long Covid are a
very engaged and desperate and vocal group. And when I meet up with them either
in real life or on social media, they feel that we're taking our time and
dragging our feet. And where are the treatments? And you must know what they
are. Why are you withholding them? And at that stage, I come across as a
professor, slow and boring and say, you know, we could have a hypothesis and
we've got to test things out and randomize control trials and work out what what
works. Otherwise, we're wasting our time and energy and maybe doing dangerous
things, you know. And yet, if I look at all the dreams we've had during the
length of my career to deliver on immunology and all the crazy things we used to
write in grant applications in the 80s and 90s, they've all come true and
they've all delivered. And there are amazing therapies for autoimmune diseases
and for cancers and things. So if you ask me, you know, do I have faith that
we'll deliver on this one as well? By we, I don't mean me. I mean, all of us as
a group. You know, totally. Absolutely. Professor Danny Altman, thank you very
much for sharing a Life Scientific. Pleasure. The Life Scientific was presented
by Jim Al-Khalili and produced by Anna Buckley. Now on Reading 4, it's one to
one. Hi, I'm Susie Rack. I'm a women's football writer for The Guardian and
author. In a previous life, long before I had ever realized that football
journalism was even an option available to me, I dreamt of being an architect. A
love of buildings and their impact developed when I was eight years old and a
student teacher had my class designing and making models of our dream homes. I
had spent all my life till then in our little two bedroom council flat in
Hoxton. Used to broken lifts and pistained stairwells and suddenly the world of
design and its potential was open up to me. I went on to study architecture at
university and then pivoted to my long term love of sport. My guest today is
Joanne Marsden, who grew up on the Park Hill Estate in Sheffield, which was
labelled a utopian housing scheme in the 1950s and built to create a new
community for families with streets in the sky. Spaces outside each home that
were wide enough for a milk float to do doorstep deliveries and people to
congregate and play in. So, Joanne, you still live in Sheffield, but you've
joined us in London for this record because you're down here for something else.
What is that? I'm down here to see a play called Standing on the Sky's Edge,
which is about Park Hill flats. Am I right in thinking you've seen it for the
eighth time? It'll be eighth time, yeah. And what is it that has resonated so
much with you? It just takes me back to when I were younger. It feels as though
somebody's wrote my life, jumbled it all up and then thrown it on stage. And
it's about three families over 60 years living in the same flat. So you've got
your first family that comes in that's a working class family. And then you've
got another family that's refugees. Although I weren't a refugee being mixed
race back in the 70s, there weren't many black families around. So I can relate
to the black families and how they talk to them like they can't understand
English in play, because people used to do that to us. And then the third family
is a middle class woman that's moved from London. She's had a break up with her
relationship and she's come to start a life in Sheffield. And that's what's
happening now to Park Hill now. They've been redeveloped. There's a lot of
people coming from all different areas, you know, from different parts of the
country. So tell me a little bit about where you grew up. Like, what was the
flat you're in like? I mean, mine, I was in the fourth floor of quite a low
rise. Like, what was yours like? I was born on there in my nan's back bedroom
and she was on eight flights up. And then we lived on third storey. So three
landings. We had a two bedroom. There were three daughters and then my mum and
my stepdad. So there were five of us living in a two bedroom flat. It was nice.
It was nice enough. It was cosy. It was warm. But what resonates with me with
what you said about every time you went in lift, it really smelt away. But it
didn't put you off using them to be fair. We used to get ourselves stuck in
lifters kids and sitting there for hours playing cards and having a sneaky
cigarette and stuff like that. When the lift was broken as well. It was just the
worst thing in the world, having to climb up all the stairs. I just remember
that. I think the thing that gets a bit lost about council estates and the way
they're talked about in the media a lot nowadays is the sense of community that
they bring. What was it like for you living there? Every day we had something
that we could do because although it were a block of flats, we had quite a lot
of grassed areas. There were loads and loads of kids to play with. So there were
always something to do. We had two school yards where we used to play football.
Even between me and boys, I was one of the best players. But like when I was at
school, girls couldn't play in a football team. So I used to play when they were
training because I used to play in out lads. They set up a surprise for me and
it would go down to Sheffield United football ground. That were closest they
ever got to a football pitch. That's amazing. Yeah, that's when I was growing up
on my estate. We weren't too far from Highbury. So everyone would leave windows
open on match days and you could just about hear the roar of the crowd from the
stadium. But then also you'd hear all the people celebrating on the estate as
well. And it was like a big thing whenever there was a big match. Everyone
around was watching it together almost like you were all on the sofa. Almost in
the same living room, which was quite cool. But similarly, we overlooked a
little play park in the center of the estate. So parents didn't have to go down
with their kids. They could just look out the window or look on the balcony and
see their kids down in the playground. They were okay. There were no roads to
cross. It was part of the estate. And I used to go down and just kick the ball
against the wall for just hours at a time. Just trying to hit the same brick to
practice my skill and accuracy. And just loved it. Loved the freedom and trust
to be able to just go down and feel very safe as well. Because a lot of the
issues and ideas that are put out about estates is that they're not safe. But
when you're part of that community, you do feel very safe. It's like everybody
watches out for everybody. You've lived a few other places beyond Park Hill,
particularly when the regeneration started and stuff. How much did it make you
look at Park Hill's design and the way the spaces were created for you? Well, I
moved out in 2006 and it was another council house that I moved into. But it was
in a really nice area, Sheffield. And I never got to know my neighbors. There
was never anything going on. It was just so different. And with Park Hill, I
think because there were a thousand properties in such a short area, they made
use of the space that were around Park Hill. So every little space allowed you
to be creative and play outdoor games. I think feeling part of something, you
always felt like you belonged. Obviously, there are certain connotations with
living on council estates. What for you were the negative aspects about living
on Park Hill? People were scared to come on Park Hill if they didn't live on
Park Hill because of what they'd read in newspapers. And it just weren't like
that. I'd come home at one or two o'clock in the morning. And as soon as I got
on Park Hill, I felt safe. Because I knew there'd be somebody looking out for me
if something were to happen, no one ever did. But it had a really bad
reputation. Yeah, I've always felt very, very defensive of council estates
whenever they're brought up linked to crime and negativity. I mean, you get
crime in every area and it may well be higher in certain areas than others. But
I think there's reasons beyond the council estate for that. Like poverty is
higher in the area, that there's a lack of investment, that education doesn't
necessarily stand up in the way that it should. And give kids opportunities when
they're coming from more difficult grounds and areas. There's so many reasons
why they have bad reputations. But I also think it's a bit of an ideological
thing too, right? When the ruling ideology is that everyone should own their own
homes and that's why you get the broken lifts for weeks and weeks on end. Yeah,
I was part of a young mums group and we tried to fundraise. We wanted money for
stairways to repair windows because our flats were becoming damp. And we felt
that they'd engineered it for it to be run down so that they could move
everybody out and redevelop it. Because it were a prime area and that's what we
thought, run up to this regeneration. And then when we all moved out, they said
that we could actually move back. But then they ran out of money and it took a
lot longer than they'd planned to redevelop it. And then everybody that had
moved out had settled in the new communities. I was so unhappy me where I lived
because like you say, everybody sells you this dream to go and find an affluent
area, get yourself a car, buy yourself a house. And I got the most beautiful
house. Honestly, it's a listed house, but it was freezing. There were no
community. If I got out of a taxi at night to go home, it was so spooky in front
garden. I used to make a taxi drive away and watch me walk into the front door.
I just didn't feel safe at all. It's ironic, isn't it? When, you know, the
council housing is generally treated as like a dangerous place to be. And you
feel more safe on the estate than you do in the nicer area of Sheffield. But
it's because when your community gets disparaged so much, there's a real
distrust there of people coming to watch or walking through, isn't there? That
you don't get if you're part of it and part of the community that's there. That
feeling, like you said, being free, being able to play out, feeling safe. I used
to love Sundays where we used to have Salvation Army, you know, playing on a
Sunday and we'd all throw money over. And then all you could smell was Sunday
dinners cooking. And I think unless you've experienced that way of life, you'll
never understand it. Yeah, no, I feel very similarly. The feeling of going up
and down the balcony in front of the doors on our roller skates and stuff. And
being shouted at by the old lady at the end who gets annoyed at the noise. And
like, I own my own home now, but it's not the same. We're settled, but I don't
feel the same sense of community. That's same as Pork Hill now. It's not same
and I don't think they can ever make it same. They'll never be able to replicate
it. Because we all grew up as kids, you know, from being really young together.
Whereas the people now that live on Pork Hill, they've come from all different
areas. But I still feel safe and it still feels like home. Do you think you
romanticised what it was like to grow up there or was it just as good? Oh no, it
was good. The community, honestly, you didn't want for now, you know, all right,
we were working class and we didn't have a lot of money. But we always went on
holiday. We always went on day trips. We always had shoes. We had everything
really to make you happy, I suppose. I felt as though I belonged there because
my nan and I were one of the first people. Everybody knew my nan and I because
she was a stand-up landing and stop all the kids and make them have a chat with
you. And my grandad, he worked in Boiler House. So my grandad, everybody knew my
grandad as well because he worked down there. When I had my own kids, we all
used to get ironing boards out on a Sunday night when we'd put kids to bed. And
then we'd all get us ironing boards out on landing and start doing us ironing,
you know, and just chat and have a coffee or whatever. Everybody helped
everybody. Everybody looked after each other. Yeah, it was the same on our
estate. So two doors along was my oldest friend. She was the same age as me. But
I remember when their third sister was born, they stayed at ours and we had a
sleepover. And likewise, they were Lebanese. I'd go to their flat and eat the
most amazing Lebanese food. And then they'd send me back with a little
tupperware for my mum. It's like having a bit of an extended family on your
doorstep. It's just a much wider group, isn't it, that comes towards you? I used
to have set days, you know, where like Sunday I'd go to my nan on Sunday dinner.
Monday I used to go to another friend's call, Maxine, and her mum used to do
bubble and squeak. You know, I loved her mum's bubble and squeak. So I had like
set days where I'd have something planned, you know. I think that's why I like
coming to London because it's so busy and every day you can plan something
different. Am I right in thinking that you wanted to study architecture at one
point? Oh yeah. I applied when my kids were in nursery, yeah, and I got a place
but I couldn't get childcare for kids. So I managed to do two semesters and then
I ended up dropping out. Was the inspiration the experience of Park Hill and
like what that had done for you in your life and your community? Yeah, because I
always wondered why they built Park Hill the shape that they built it, you know,
like in an S shape. I could never understand and I always wondered what were
thinking behind it. I think the design of the estate was very much tied to a big
architect, very famous, called Le Corbusier, who designed a lot of buildings and
developed this idea of streets in the sky and having all of these communal
spaces. And the really famous building he built in Marseille called Unité de
Habitation was, it had streets where you had nurseries and grocers within the
block. And there was like a little communal swimming pool on top and things like
that. And I think it was based on that. Do you think that that worked? Did that
enhance it? Because you had the pub and there were shops and stuff weren't there
as part of it? Yeah, we had all shops. You didn't have to go into town for
anything. And then we had a juniors and infants school and a nursery. So it were
only when you got to 12 that you had to actually come off estate to go to
another school. How do you think it's shaped you as a person? I like helping
people. An example, do you know when I'd moved off Park Hill, this new estate
that we moved on to, they moved all different families in. It was an estate
built for families and all kids. They'd come from all different parts of
Sheffield. So they were constantly fighting. Parents were constantly coming out
and arguing with each other. So I set up a little bike club because I love
cycling as well. So I thought, God, if I can get all kids a bike, I can start
taking them on bike rides. And then if I can get some cohesion with kids, we can
start building a community. Eventually, I'd got all kids coming around with a
bike. Some kids had got brand new bikes. Some kids had not got bikes. So I asked
bin men, do you know if you see any scrap bikes while you're going around, can
you throw them on my back garden? And we started doing a little project where we
built every kid on estate a bike. And that's what we did every Tuesday. I'd do a
big pan of chips for kids, get newspaper, game a corner chips. I'd get a big
bottle of dilute pop and we'd start fixing each other's bikes. And that's how I
started building a community. And I think that's what I learned from being
brought up on Pork Hill. That if we share and everybody's got, then nobody goes
without. And it stayed with me. If I can help somebody, I'll help them. Thank
you so much. Anything to do with Pork Hill, I'm happy to talk about. So thank
you for inviting me. One to one was presented by Susie Rack and produced by
Caitlin Hobbs. On BBC Radio 4, we are all a unique accumulation of our own
unique experiences and knowledge. The poet, Lem Sissay, looks at uniqueness.
Rainfall like applause is utterly unique every time it happens. Reflecting on
the occasions he's stood out. In a room full of graduates, people without
degrees can sometimes get defensive about it. Not me! Lem Sissay is the one and
only. He'll like an aw. Starting this Friday morning at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC
Sounds. Now on Radio 4, our Book of the Week. As he tours Britain's graveyards,
the journalist Peter Ross reaches Belfast. Where he finds a heady and
controversial blend of sacrifice and martyrdom among the stones. A Tomb With a
View is read by Andy Clark. Belfast. Easter Sunday. It was high noon and the
crowds had gathered for the parades. Three separate Republican marches were
setting off at different times from different junctions on the Falls Road. In
each case, the destination was the same. Milltown Cemetery, where the fallen
would be honoured with speeches in silence, bowed heads and unbowed hearts.
These annual processions commemorate the Easter Rising of 1916, the armed
rebellion against British rule. They honour too the so-called Patriot Dead.
These include not only the rebels of 1916, but also members of paramilitary
groups who would more commonly be described as terrorists. If anyone was under
the illusion that the deaths being remembered belonged to a dark history now
past, or that Ireland's political violence was over, what happened three nights
before would have provided a stinging corrective. A police search for firearms
and explosives on Derry's Craigan estate led to a riot. Petro-bombs were thrown,
and at 11pm a masked gunman opened fire on police lines. Lyra McKee, a young
journalist covering the unrest, was shot. She was taken to hospital, where she
died. The new IRA admitted responsibility. Here was yet another life lost before
it had properly begun. All those callow ghosts. I grew up on the UK mainland and
followed the troubles through the lens of the BBC, so there was something
bewildering and unsettling about watching this Easter Sunday parade in Belfast,
where armed rebels were celebrated and mourned. What unsettles is the seduction.
There's a dark romance to these ideas of sacrifice and martyrdom. They colour
Belfast like some hidden pigment. It's in those murals, Loyalist and Republican,
which brighten the gable ends of houses. It's in every drop of blood spilled on
these streets. Irish republicanism has been described as a death cult. Whether
or not that's fair, it's certain that the dead help keep the movement alive. In
1915, the revolutionary leader Patrick Pearce gave a famous oration in which he
argued that from the graves of patriot men and women spring living nations. He
ended with an attack on the British state. They've left us our Finian dead, and
while Ireland holds these graves, Ireland unfree will never be at peace. Those
words are carved into granite at one end of the Republican plot in Milltown
Cemetery. This area is the destination of the largest of the Easter parades.
It's regarded by some as a sacred site. The plot holds the remains of 77
Republicans, most of them members of the Provisional IRA who were killed during
active service. Bobby Sands is one of three hunger strikers who died in the Mays
prison in 1981. They're all here. Milltown is a striking place, rich in Catholic
iconography. Entering through a grand sandstone arch, the visitor soon passes
the marble monument above the grave of John Burke, a shipping magnate who died
in 1922. It shows Mary and Mary Magdalene lamenting the crucifixion. The dirt of
almost a century has turned Christ and his mother a sooty grey, but the
Magdalene has somehow remained white and pure. These figures are everywhere in
Milltown. On one of the newer graves, someone had placed a statuette of the
Virgin next to a bar of Fry's chocolate cream. I'd come here the day before the
parades to speak with Joe Austin. He's the chair of the National Graves
Association in Belfast, the organisation which cares for the graves and
monuments of those who've died in the cause. Austin is a veteran Republican
activist. He's been a member of Sinn Féin for almost 50 years. It's sometimes
said that a cemetery can tell the story of a city. For Austin, Milltown tells
the story of a struggle. For Republicans, the honouring of the dead is very,
very important, he explained. Graveyards reflect the memory of those who died,
but they also reflect why they died, what they died for. The people buried here
aren't just names for us, he said. There's 77 buried in this particular plot. I
would know every one of them. I would know their families. I would know the
circumstances in which they died. These are people I've come through struggle
with. The Gibraltar Three, Maraid Farrell, Sean Savage and Dan McCann, are
buried together. Executed by SAS, says a marker, 6th March 1988. According to
Austin, what you have to understand is not only how they died, but how they
lived. They lived as active, committed IRA volunteers, he said. They knew what
they were doing. Would they be seen then as heroes, I asked. Yes, he replied.
Everybody who lies in these plots is a fallen hero to the community they come
from. There's no equivocation about it. I asked Austin whether the huge death
toll of the Troubles was worth it. Well, he said, that's like asking someone who
was involved in the D-Day landing if it was worth it. Many would find those
comparisons repulsive. Similarly, most people outside West Belfast would
probably find it hard to accept the description of IRA members as heroes. The
first burials in the Republican plot took place in the summer of 1972, and the
last in 1996. To be laid to rest there, it's necessary to have died as a result
of some form of violence in the cause, whether in a shootout or through the slow
suicide of hunger strike. The dead lie on either side of a central path around
40 feet long. No funerals have taken place since the Good Friday Agreement
established an imperfect peace. The flowers and flags and headstones, at a
certain point, run out. Our greatest ambition, Austin had told me, is that no
one else is ever buried here. Nevertheless, the space for future burials
remains. Soil for a bitter crop. It's perhaps the most toxic 15 feet of land in
the whole of Northern Ireland. Gunmen's graves as yet unfilled. The oldest
burial ground in Belfast is Friars Bush. It's hidden behind a high wall and open
only by appointment. A peaceful two acres, a little overgrown. It first appeared
in the historic record in 1570, but it's likely much older. This is where
Belfast's Catholics were buried before Milltown was built. Indeed, the whole
reason for Milltown's existence was because Friars Bush became full to
overflowing. The graveyard's secluded location made it suitable for the secret
celebration of Mass during the late 17th and 18th centuries, when Catholics were
discriminated against and persecuted. In 1869, with the opening of Milltown,
Friars Bush closed. From that point, only families who already had burial rights
were allowed to be interred in the graveyard. The painter Paul Henry, who grew
up in the area, recalled in his memoirs that by the 1880s it was a rarity to see
a funeral. He recalled his childhood impressions with a Dickensian eye. I often
saw, he wrote, the old caretaker of the burial ground, a hunchback with a face
deeply marked with smallpox. Sometimes on a dark night I would hear the rusty
old gate clanging in the wind. And after nightfall, when no light shone from the
tiny window, it was the house of the dead. Tom Hartley, the former Lord Mayor,
is an authority on Belfast's graveyards. As a Catholic, his family, including
his parents and younger brother, are buried in Milltown. He has an interesting
take on death and the rituals we've developed to formalise it. For tens of
thousands of years, he said, human beings have been burying our dead. We're part
of an experience that's ancient and it's so obvious that we fail to see it. He
believes we've come to regard burial and funerals as mundane. We don't
appreciate the importance of these acts to our civilisation. Somewhere, tens of
thousands of years ago, he says, somebody somewhere decided they would bury
their dead. And in doing that, they unfolded a whole series of human changes. He
believes our ideas of history and art, our sense of place, even the development
of emotions such as grief, have emerged from how we treat our dead. His thinking
was formed, I suspect, when he was still a boy, not yet five. When someone in
the neighbourhood died, word would go round. A black bow tied on the front door
was a sign of a wake house. Hartley and his pals would gather outside until one
of them worked up the courage to knock. Mrs, they would ask, can we see the
dead? Invited in, they would troop up the stairs. The corpse would be laid out
on the bed. He remembers, with a child's eye view, that you would see the feet
first. There was a sense of stopped clocks, stilled air. The room would be heavy
with that aroma of candles. A circle of children around the bed. They weren't
being morbid. This was common. It was a very important mechanism in the
community, says Hartley. Even though you might be frightened and pushed up the
stairs by the ten kids behind, you saw a dead person. I think it's fundamental
to coming to terms with the idea that someday you die. Belfast, Easter
Wednesday, 2019. The Church of Ireland Cathedral. It was high noon and crowds
had gathered outside for the funeral of Lyra McKee. A reward of up to £10,000
had been offered for information leading to the conviction of those responsible
for her killing. But today wasn't about justice, or its coarse cousin, revenge.
The people had come to celebrate and mourn. Inside, the chairs were filling up.
One of McKee's friends laid out yellow scarves with black stripes. Mourners had
been invited to wear clothes which reflected her love of Harry Potter. Yellow
and black, the Hufflepuff colours, represent wheat and soil. Across the aisle
from me, a young man wore an I Stand With Lyra T-shirt. A little to my right was
Father Joseph Gormley, the priest who'd anointed McKee in hospital. I'd seen him
on the news, calling for the Easter parade through Derry to be cancelled. The
cathedral doors opened and a cold air blew. People turned with pale faces. The
coffin was beautiful, as these things go, carved with Celtic knotwork and a
cross. But there was no masking the horror, the brute physical fact of it. Lyra
was 29 when she died. No age at all. She'd been a late developer. In her early
school days, she'd struggled with reading and required extra support. But later
she became precocious. There were journalism awards and a book deal. A bright
future, everyone said. There was a sense, listening to the service, that what
had happened was not only murder, but also theft. A thing of value had been
stolen from the world. One couldn't help thinking, as her story was told, of all
the stories she would never tell now. She was buried at a quarter to four on a
hazy afternoon. Once the grave diggers had done their work and the mourners
gone, the only sound was birdsong. The grave was covered in floral tributes. One
card read, Words fail me. That felt about right. We carve words on stone to
remember our dead. Their names and dates and some blandly appropriate text.
There's a formality and finality to the conventions of headstones which takes
all the mess of grief and loss and reduces it to something which can be said
with hammer and chisel. A beloved wife of, sadly missed by. But that wee card
with its admission of the limits of language felt real. Perhaps these are the
truths we should engrave in straight lines and elegant fonts. Words fail me. I
don't know how I'm going to get through this. I will never be the same again.
Lyra McKee lies in a corner of Carn Money Cemetery, north of Belfast. She's
wearing a flower in her hair. A Tomb With A View by Peter Ross was abridged by
Anna Magnusson. The producer is Aileen McCready. This year as part of Red Nose
Day you could win an iconic BBC treasure. We are making changes to the way BBC
live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms and the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds. Red Nose Day. We'll find the terms and
conditions and privacy notice. You must be 18 or over to enter. The giveaway
closes at 11.59pm.