TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is BBC Radio 4. Good morning, it's six o'clock on Friday the 3rd of March.
This is Today with Michelle Hussain and Nick Robinson. The headlines this
morning. Energy firms have told the BBC they expect the government to continue
some of its support for household gas and electricity bills beyond April. Senior
Conservative MPs are furious that the former civil servant who led the Partygate
inquiry has been offered a job by Sir Keir Starmer. Also in today's programme,
John Snow on his new book on the state of the country and talking to Nick about
impartiality in news. You think I'm a lefty, I think you're a righty. It's
rather healthy that the two of us can sit in a studio and have a reasonable
discussion. And today is Ken Bruce's last on-air at the BBC. He's done his exit
interview with one of us. A lifetime on radio. What's been the very best moment
so far? Talking to you, Gary. I can die happy now. A charmer. Both of them,
really. The whole conversation is coming up at twenty past eight. Beat matching.
What is going on in a DJ's brain to make it happen? The BBC News is read by Jane
Steel. The BBC understands that a number of energy companies are preparing for
the government to maintain some level of support for home energy bills beyond
April, when the current assistance was due to finish. However, the separate £400
winter discount will end this month as planned, so most households will have to
pay out more. The Treasury says it's reviewing the situation. Here's our
business editor, Simon Jack. Typical households are due to see their energy
bills rise from £2,500 to £3,000 per year on April 1st, as government subsidies
are scaled back. However, as wholesale energy prices have fallen dramatically
since last autumn, the cost of those subsidies is tens of billions of pounds
lower than initial estimates. The government has been under intense pressure to
use that unspent kitty to maintain support at or near current levels. The BBC
has learned that some energy companies are already preparing bills for April,
which assume that will happen. A man and a woman are due to appear before
magistrates today after the body of a baby was found in woods near Brighton on
Wednesday. The couple face a number of charges. This report from Aruna Iyengar.
The Crown Prosecution Service said Constance Martin and Mark Gordon had been
charged with gross negligence manslaughter, concealing the birth of a child and
perverting the course of justice. The body of a baby was found in some woods
near Brighton on Wednesday following a two-day search. Yesterday, police said it
was too early to say when the infant died, but it may have been some time ago.
They said it was not yet possible to determine the sex of the baby. Several
senior Conservatives have expressed anger that the former senior civil servant
Sue Gray has been offered the role of Chief of Staff to the Labour leader Sikir
Starmer. Ms Gray led the investigation into lockdown parties in Downing Street,
which was highly critical of Boris Johnson, among others. The Conservative peer
Lord Greenhouse said the story called into question Ms Gray's impartiality. You
do not hire someone so close to you without having considerable engagement. To
what extent do we think that she wasn't informally briefing him? She's in the
Cabinet Office in Duloc. She's right at the heart in the engine room of
government. To what extent do we think she wasn't having conversations about
things in government? The idea that hasn't been happening is patently ludicrous.
The Conservative Party's deputy chairman has said he has sympathy with people
who've taken part in recent protests outside hotels housing asylum seekers. Lee
Anderson told the Political Thinking with Nick Robinson podcast that it was
human nature to be concerned about a sudden change to a community. Some of the
demonstrations have resulted in arrests for violent behaviour. This report from
Jack Fennec. Government data released last month showed there were more than
37,000 asylum seekers being housed in short-term accommodation in September last
year, mostly in hotels. A protest in Liverpool last month was triggered by
allegations that a man had made inappropriate comments to a local teenage girl.
Lee Anderson told Nick Robinson's Political Thinking podcast that such stories
had left people understandably worried. Some recent protests outside hotels
housing asylum seekers have been linked to far-right groups. The anti-extremism
organisation Hope Not Hate said the far-right were peddling myths about people
housed in hotels and that a Conservative MP should not be amplifying these
messages. You can hear the full interview with Lee Anderson tomorrow at 5.30pm
on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. A prominent lawyer in the United States will be
sentenced today for the murder of his wife and son in South Carolina. Alex
Murdoch was convicted of shooting the pair to distract attention from his theft
of millions of dollars from clients, which he used to fund a drug habit. There's
been intense interest in the case across the US. Judge Clifton Newman said he
faced many years in prison. Mr Murdoch, you now having been found guilty of two
counts of murder involving your wife and your son, two counts of possession of a
weapon during the commission of a violent crime. Of course the minimum sentence
for murder is 30 years, the maximum sentence is life imprisonment. The
broadcaster Ken Bruce will present his final show on BBC Radio 2 today. He's
fronted the mid-morning programme for more than 30 years, but his career with
the corporation began in 1977. In an interview for this programme, Ken Bruce,
who will be replaced by Vernon Kay from May, was asked what the secret to his
popularity was. I don't think you can ever analyse why something is popular. It
becomes popular without you either noticing or trying. It's a bit like a
catchphrase. You can't write a catchphrase and say, I'm going to make this
popular. It has to come naturally, something you've said that people pick up.
But if you try and create it, it will never happen. So similarly, a good
relationship between broadcaster and listener is something that just grows and
develops naturally. And you can hear that interview with Ken Bruce on this
programme at 20 past eight. Looking forward to that, Jane. Thank you very much
indeed. Six minutes past six. Can we look forward to the weather? Helen Willets
has the answer. Morning, Helen. Good morning, Nick. It depends what type of
weather you like. Crisp and sunny, not so much today. Cold and rather cloudy
under high pressure today. Different areas will see the sunshine to those where
we saw it yesterday. I think it'll be lacking in supply a little more. For
example, across England and Wales, we wake up to rather cloudy skies. There's a
little bit of frost where the skies are stayed clear, the odd pocket of mist and
fog. But it's generally, there's more cloud around than yesterday, notably for
southern England, for the Midlands, for East Anglia and for Wales, northwest
England too. But I'm hopeful that the skies will brighten as the day goes on,
particularly across eastern parts of England, the south-east, giving a little
bit more breeze coming in today off the North Sea just to help those breaks
develop. But it will be mainly dry, but mainly cloudy and feeling quite chilly,
I suppose, without the sunshine, seven or eight, but locally up to 10 when we do
see that sunshine coming through. And we do just have a few light showers across
northern England as well. Northern Ireland, similar story, really. We had a lot
of cloud here yesterday. There were some breaks. There's a quite thick cloud
around this morning and some showers. But again, hopefully as the day goes on,
there'll be a little bit more brightness coming through, but fairly limited, a
chilly six or seven here. And for Scotland as well, more cloud again. I think
the best chance of some sunshine coming through in the Northern Isles and the
far north of Scotland, in the south, as we're seeing in Northern Ireland,
there's quite a few scattered showers, just indicative of the cloud being quite
thick. Temperatures today, about six to eight degrees Celsius. Thank you very
much, Helen. It's eight minutes past six. Let's have a look at the papers and
the news websites. Is this proof the Partygate probe was a Labour plot, asked
the Daily Mail. It says there's outrage among Conservative MPs over what it
calls Sakir Starmer's plum job offer to Sue Gray. It says allies of Boris
Johnson believe it shows the senior civil servant's investigation into Downing
Street lockdown parties was a stitch up. The Guardian reports they've launched
an all-out effort to scupper a parliamentary inquiry into the scandal. According
to the Times, the Prime Minister is concerned that Sue Gray could use privileged
information to benefit Labour. The Financial Times says Rishi Sunak may
intervene to block her from taking up the role for months. The latest instalment
of the so-called lockdown files in The Telegraph suggests that during the
pandemic, senior police officers were summoned to Downing Street and told to be
strict in enforcing Covid rules. Leaked WhatsApp messages reveal the then Health
Secretary Matt Hancock gave them what he called marching orders and suggested
ministers needed to, quote, get heavy with the police. The paper says the
messaging suggests a worrying erosion of the police's operational independence.
The Telegraph also reports officials joked about locking up travellers in what
they called shoebox rooms when they returned from holidays. It quotes WhatsApp
messages from when the UK introduced quarantine hotels to reduce the spread, the
risk of spreading coronavirus. In the Mirror, teachers respond to the messages
in which Mr Hancock and the former Education Secretary Sir Gavin Williamson
criticised them and their unions. One teacher tells the paper they were beyond
angry and frankly disgusted. Another described the comments as repugnant. The
paper's leader column says teachers were absolute heroes during the pandemic,
whilst the two ministers sent puerile messages like silly schoolboys. Mr Hancock
says the messages are partial accounts, spun with an agenda. Sir Gavin insists
he was referring to some unions, not teachers. MI5 could have stopped him, says
the front page of the digital only independent as it reports on the findings of
the inquiry into the Manchester arena bombing. Failed is the Daily Mirror's
take. The Guardian focuses on what it calls the fury of victims' families. The
Sun says the bomber Salman Abedi had been free to murder angels. Its headline is
22 who should be alive. The Mirror reports that the Duke and Duchess of Sussex
were evicted from their UK home after the King learned of Harry's accusations
against the Queen consort. Sources tell the paper the King was outraged by the
Duke's claims, including that Camilla had leaked stories to the press. They say
the monarch believed his son had crossed a line. According to the Eye, whales
employ a vocal technique similar to one used by humans to help them track and
catch their prey. A study has found that when hunting, sperm whales, dolphins
and porpoises use a vocal fry which involves dropping the voice to its lowest
natural register. The paper compares their singing with that of Mick Jagger and
Britney Spears. Really? Really? Is there any comparison between the singing of
Mick Jagger and Britney Spears? To be discussed. The producers will now work on
a mix, I'm sure, behind the scenes of a whale. Britney Spears and Mick Jagger.
The time now is ten past six. The executive in charge of HS2 has said in a BBC
interview that the need to save money could mean the project takes longer. The
current cost of HS2, more than £70 billion, is more than twice what was
envisaged in 2010. The interview was with our transport correspondent Katie
Austin. What did he say, Katie? Morning. Well, just to recap, this is a project
meant to improve journey times and add capacity on the network, although it
still has plenty of opponents on various grounds, including those who think the
money would be better spent elsewhere, and it's long been beset by rising costs
and delays. HS2 Limited's chief executive, Mark Thurston, told me work on the
first stretch, that's between London and Birmingham, was 40% complete, with
30,000 people already working on it, so construction is very much underway. But
he said inflation had had a significant impact in the last year, whether that's
the cost of timber, steel, other materials, labour, energy, you name it. HS2 and
the government have been looking at ways of mitigating the cost rises, basically
to ensure it doesn't bust the current budget, because this is at a time when the
Department for Transport's budget is not due to keep up with inflation. And Mark
Thurston said finding savings in the supply chain, but also the timing of the
project, the phasing of the project, are all things being looked at. He did,
though, say the scope of the London to Birmingham phase was being protected.
When it comes to delays, he said, well, actually, delays don't typically save
money in the long run. But he added a number of options were being looked at
with the Department for Transport. Ultimately, it's their decision what happens,
if anything, you know, more substantial is to be done, like actually cutting
future parts of the railway. But some of the project, the final stages, aren't
due to be delivered for nearly 20 years. Does this suggest that it could be even
later? Potentially. And one rail consultant I spoke to who's previously worked
for the project said actually, if really big savings are needed, then cuts
further along the line, you know, between Birmingham and Crewe and Manchester
might be the only way of achieving that if it's sort of tens of billions. But he
said in his view, that should be avoided because the benefits of that line would
then be lost. And the Chancellor has recently said he couldn't see any
conceivable circumstances in which HS2 didn't go all the way to Euston in
central London. The first phase actually will start from Old Oak Common in West
London before going on to Euston later. But the official government line, the
line from the government spokesperson is that HS2 would provide transformational
benefits and the government remains committed to delivering the high speed line
from Euston to Manchester. They added, though, that the government continued to
carry out regular reviews of the scope, schedule and cost of the project to
ensure it delivered value for money. So I think it's clear that difficult
decisions could potentially lie ahead. Katie, thanks. 13 minutes past six.
President Biden and Chancellor Schulz of Germany will discuss a new package of
military aid for Ukraine today as the battle for Bakhmut grinds on. Let's talk
to our Ukraine correspondent, James Waterhouse. Morning, James. Do we know what
it is that they will propose to deliver next to Ukraine? Morning, Nick. Well,
it's a continuation of America's sizable support for Ukraine's war effort,
really. We're talking about additional ammunition for those HIMARS long range
missile systems. We're talking about ammunition for armoured vehicles. And this
is a 400 million dollar package, which which sits on top of a of a support so
far costing more than 32 billion dollars. But what's interesting is the national
security spokesman, John Kirby, was asked whether sanctions would be discussed
for China. And he said, well, given the context of what we're talking about with
Ukraine, third party support for Russia, you would expect would come up. And I
think we are seeing America and the West's continued concerns that China is
looking to support Russia in more of a military sense. However, the US hasn't
offered any support or any evidence supporting that claim. And Beijing at the
moment is continuing to deny that. Thus far, Beijing has refused to condemn the
war and it has strengthened economic ties with Russia. But you can see the
concern remains because we are still in the midst of a war of attrition where we
are seeing Russia launch. It's already launched its spring offensives across
multiple points of the eastern front line. So support behind that military
effort matters. And you can see the West is now gearing up to possibly move in
another way to try and hinder Moscow's war effort. James Watthouse in Kiev.
Thank you. Now it's quarter past six. Two leading UK companies have chosen to
list on the New York Stock Exchange rather than London. Has London therefore
lost its shine? A question for Felicity this morning. Morning, Feliz. Morning.
Yes, the building's material giant, CRH, is planning to move its main share
listing from the UK to the US. And there are also reports that the UK chipmaker
Arm is looking to list in New York rather than London. Arm was on the FTSE 100
until 2016 and it was then bought by SoftBank for £24 billion. This news follows
the betting firm Flutter saying it's also considering a US share listing.
Joining me now is Mark Austin, partner at the law firm Freshields. And Mark, you
chaired a review for the Chancellor into how to attract future IPOs. Good
morning. Good morning, Felicity. Let's start with Arm. This is a Cambridge-based
chip manufacturer. This is a huge UK tech success story. These reports will be a
blow. Well, I would say on that, I mean, the company hasn't made an announcement
yet until they do everything is speculation. But clearly, it's an important
British company. And so, if it does decide despite the efforts that have been
made to move to New York or list in New York, then it would be a loss. That's
for sure. And it does illustrate, I think, that if that did happen, that the
program of reform that's happening in London at the moment and the UK more
generally as a financial center needs to continue. There are things that need to
change and they are. I mean, everyone gets it now. I think it's true to say from
government all the way down. In my review, various other reviews, task forces,
committees that are going on are all evidence of that. The FT has the headline,
Fears for City Status. Do you fear for the London stock market? I don't,
actually. I don't. I mean, we still have 2,000 companies here. We're one of the
largest equity markets in the world. In 2021, we were the largest center for
IPOs globally outside the U.S. and China. But it's not to say reform isn't
needed and it's needed quickly. And there's a whole series of areas where
actually that's already happening. There's listing reform happening. The FCA has
actually been doing a great job in driving that forward and that's going to
continue. We're having discussions around governance reform. Very importantly
and a number of people have said this recently and are continuing to say, we
need some risk capital reform, liquidity. We need more liquidity in the London
markets, freeing up pension capital to actually invest in UK companies. I mean,
one of the startling statistics is that only 4% of shares listed in London these
days are actually owned by UK pension funds and insurers. And then finally, one
of the hardest conversations actually is that there is – that it's happening, is
recreating this insurgent mindset in London that we've always been so good at
and actually creating cultural and attitudinal reform, both to more sort of
risk-averse culture – sorry, more risk-taking culture, but also just celebrating
success rather than denigrating it. How do you achieve that then? I mean, how do
you turn around a risk-averse culture? Well, I think you do it for a number of
things. There's some – obviously, some cultural discussions you can have around
the attitude that we take to what we're doing, creating a positive mindset. But
I think in specifics, for example, in the risk capital area I just talked about,
there's the ongoing reform of solvency too. That's critical to allowing insurers
to deploy more risk capital. And then also – and that will also help with our
defined benefit pension schemes unlocking. And the second, for example, is swift
consolidation of defined contribution pension schemes and then creating
structural incentives for them to deploy that capital in the UK. And a renewed
focus actually on returns rather than simply fees, which has sometimes been the
case. It can be quite counterintuitive for anyone who's not immersed in it like
you. Some of these listings, for example, why is Manchester United, one of the
UK's largest, most iconic football clubs, listed in New York and not London?
Well, I think every company has its own reasons. And it's not to deny that New
York is a big, large, liquid capital market. Sometimes it does make more sense
for some companies to list there. But if you look at actually the companies
recently that we've been talking about, they're either may move there and list
there or are adding overseas listings. You mentioned CRH. Now, CRH has got 75%
of its revenue in the States. BHP had a tax incentive to move their primary
listing back to Australia. So, I don't think it's always that helpful just to
pick on individual companies because they will always have their reasons and
they're always the logical reasons why they would do – make their own decisions.
But the thing that we mustn't forget is that London still is a big equity
capital market and it's reforming itself to make itself even more competitive.
Mark Austin, thank you very much indeed for joining us. Listening to that is
Simon French, Chief Economist at Panmure Gordon. Simon, what do you make of the
idea that the U.K. is simply a more risk-averse market? Yeah, good morning,
Felicity. I agree with almost everything that Mark said. One of the challenges
facing investors looking to allocate capital to the U.K. is an aspect that Mark
didn't unfortunately cover, which is valuations. And you mentioned the
Manchester United listing. The incentive to list in the U.K. is impaired by the
fact that our companies on average attract about half the level of valuation
seen on the U.S. market. And therefore, entrepreneurs, founders, even existing
businesses looking to relist in the case of Arm, are wondering why they should
have to give away twice as much of their company for the privilege of listing in
London. Unfortunately, that discount has emerged almost entirely since the
Brexit vote of 2016. So part of answering your question on how you get a more
greater risk appetite back into the City of London is international investors
who allocate that capital have to see the risk-reward ratio better than it has
been for the last six and a half years. Okay, well from those international
markets to the energy market closer to home, the BBC understands that some
energy firms are preparing to change bills because they're expecting the
government is going to keep its energy support at or near current levels. So
typical household energy bills are set to rise to £3,000 a year from April.
There have been calls made for the government to keep its current level of
support, which would keep them at typically £2,500. A Treasury source has
declined to comment on speculation. Simon, you have a Treasury background. Can
the Chancellor afford to do that? Yes, he can. When the energy price guarantee
was initially unveiled on the 8th of September last year and then revised in
November, the wholesale gas price, which makes the pricing for most of the UK
energy space, was about three times the level it is today. We're trading it on a
forward curve of about 120p per therm. It was about 360p per therm in early
September. What that means for the Treasury is that the amount of money that
they were going to give to energy companies to ensure that prices were capped
for households and businesses is considerably lower in this financial year and
into next financial year. Do I expect them to reallocate some of that money to
keep the energy price guaranteed, its current £2,500 level for the average
household? Yes, I do. Simon French, Chief Economist at Panmure Gordon. Thank you
very much. Well, inflation is running high. The world's biggest brewing company
says that despite that, it's not seeing any fall in demand. I've been speaking
to Fernando Tenenbaum, the Chief Financial Officer of AB InBev. You might not
know AB InBev, but its brands you will know, they include Budweiser, Stella
Artois and Beck's. I asked him about the impact of rising costs on the business
and about those global supply chain challenges. Beer is a very local business.
Most of our raw materials we source and most of our production is actually on
the markets where we sell our products. We tend not to be much affected by
supply chain issues. So, supply chain was not too much of an issue. Inflation,
we tend to over time always sink our prices with consumer inflation. So, it
shouldn't be an issue as long as we continue to maintain this policy and we are
doing so. So, I feel both from an inflation standpoint and supply chain
standpoint, I don't feel any major issue for us as we speak. So, you passed on
rising prices to your customers? We always price consumer inflation. So, every
year we try to follow the CPI in all the different markets where we operate. And
as long as you follow the CPI, you don't see any meaningful impact on demand.
You continue to see strong demand. Actually, we continue to see premiumization
growing. People are buying more and more premium products. So, we continue to
see the industry and our portfolio being very healthy. That's quite
counterintuitive when people are seeing their bills going up, that they would be
moving to premium products. Why do you think that is? Beer is a very affordable
category. And even premium beer is a very affordable luxury. So, if people are
making choices, normally they tend to choose beer because that's something that
they can afford. That's something that they can share with friends. Beer at the
end of the day is very inclusive and we benefit from that. How has the war in
Ukraine impacted AB in BEV? From a supply chain, it didn't impact because at the
end of the day, we are very local. That's what you mentioned. The secondary
impact that you have, you saw a lot of cost of goods sold going up. You saw a
lot of raw materials. You see energy prices in Europe going up. So, you are
affected from a cost standpoint, not necessarily from a supply standpoint. Are
you expecting that to continue this year? It's very hard to make any forecast.
What we've been seeing is that after the initial spike, prices of some
commodities, they have come down, even though they are more elevated than they
were pre the conflict. So, very hard to make a forecast, but they are trending
in the right direction. Turning to the UK market, UK hospitality says that it's
seen the fastest closure rate of pubs and restaurants in the last three months
of last year. So, more than 1,600 premises closed. Are you worried about that?
UK is not different than any other market in the world. What we ended up seeing
and we learned a lot on that through the pandemic when some of the channels were
closed is that the underlying consumption remains strong. What happens is that
the consumer find – they found new consumption occasions. We see a lot of pickup
of in-home. UK is no different than that. UK, you are seeing in-home consumption
growing. And every market has its own nuances, but the underlying demand seems
to be good across the globe. So, your customers are simply drinking at home
instead of drinking in the pub? Yes. The underlying demand continues to be the
same. They are drinking more at home than they are drinking at home premises,
but the overall consumption remains strong. So, that was Fernando Tenenbaum,
Chief Financial Officer at AB InBev. Still with me is Simon French from Panmure
Gordon. Simon, consumers aren't buying less and they are upgrading to premium
products. Briefly, are some sectors just immune to the squeeze? Immune for now.
We are seeing quite a lot of what was previously pent-up demand during the
pandemic for experiences of which going out to restaurants and bars is part of
that. That has been surprisingly resilient. Plenty of evidence that consumers
are trying to protect that as their budgets are squeezed through other consumer
staples. So, beer continues to be a good investment? It does indeed. Simon
French, Chief Economist at Panmure Gordon, thank you very much. Thank you very
much. And it's time for the Sports with Gary at 27 minutes past. Good morning,
Gary. Good morning to you. It's live cricket reports for you throughout the
programme this morning. We are following England in the second one-day
international against Bangladesh. England one up in the series. Play began at 6
o'clock. Let's cross to Kevin Howells for the very latest. Kevin, good morning.
Very good morning to you, Gary. England have just lost their first wicket. Phil
Salt has been called a thick-headed shirt to slip. He's gone for seven off the
pace bowling of Taskin. So, it's 25 for one at the moment. England score in the
seventh over. To put it in context, Bangladesh have won the toss as they did in
the first game. This time decided to field first. So, England setting the
target. Josh Butler saying he would have done the same. They have won the toss.
Two changes for England. Rotating the bowlers. Sam Curran for Chris Wokes. Saki
Bhamud returns after a year-long injury, a back injury. He replaces Jofra
Archer. Bangladesh are unchanged. Jason Roy on 18. England 25 for one in the
seventh over. More with Kevin in an hour. Later today, former England captain
Michael Vaughan is expected to appear at the Cricket Discipline Commission into
allegations of racism made by Azeem Rafiq. Sports editor Dan Rowan reports.
Michael Vaughan captained England to ashes glory in 2005. But for the last two
years, his reputation and his career as a BBC broadcaster have been in jeopardy
after he was alleged to have used racist language by a former Yorkshire team-
mate, Azeem Rafiq. A current England star Adeel Rashid has corroborated Rafiq's
allegation. Asked by Vaughan's lawyer Christopher Stoner KC of his memory of the
alleged incident, Rashid claimed Vaughan had said, there's too many of you lot,
we need to do something about it. Mr Stoner suggested that Rashid did not have a
clear memory of events, which Rashid rejected, along with claims that he'd been
pressured into backing up Rafiq. However, he did say that he didn't believe
Vaughan was a racist and that he believed the comments were a poor attempt at
humour. Vaughan himself is set to give evidence on the third day of this
hearing, the latest episode in a saga that continues to cast a shadow over the
game. Golf World No. 1, John Rahm has a two-stroke lead going into the second
round of the Arnold Palmer Invitational Tournament. England's Aaron Rye is three
off the lead. Danny Willett and Matt Fitzpatrick are five off the pace. A
second-half comeback saw Warrington defeat Salford 36-20 and they've won three
matches out of three at the start of the new Super League season. Here are the
racing selections, one for Doncaster, 345 No. 4, Mo Vidi, Newbury 430 No. 3,
Gaelic Jorty. Thank you very much Gav. Didn't sound too sure about those, did I?
No, you didn't but once you said it I trusted it, it must be right. And it's
fine because when you've got your new programme on Radio 2 replacing Ken Bruce
then you won't need to worry about racing. Not at all. BBC Sounds Seven years
ago I was filming at East London Mosque when the story broke. The three school
girls from the area had gone missing. They were heading to Syria to join the
Islamic State group. Breaking news this morning, three British school girls are
reportedly missing. Shamima Begum was the only one of the girls to emerge from
the ashes of the so-called caliphate. I've retraced her steps from the UK
through Turkey and into Syria to find people who knew her and to investigate the
truth of her story. What do you think people think of you? As a danger, as a
risk, as a potential risk. From BBC Radio 4, the Shamima Begum story, series 2
of I'm Not a Monster. Listen on BBC Sounds. Time now is half past six. You're
listening to Today on BBC Radio 4 with Michelle Hussain and Nick Robinson. And
Jane Steel has a summary of the news. The BBC understands some energy companies
are preparing for the government to extend its support for household bills after
next month when the price cap is due to rise. The cost of powering a typical
home is expected to rise from £2,500 to £3,000. But ministers are under pressure
to use money saved from lower wholesale energy prices to limit this increase.
The Treasury says it is reviewing the situation. A man and a woman are due to
appear before magistrates in Crawley today after the body of a baby was found in
woods near Brighton on Wednesday. Police said the infant may have died some time
ago. Constance Martin and Mark Gordon have been charged with gross negligence
manslaughter, concealing the birth of a child and perverting the course of
justice. Allies of the former Prime Minister Boris Johnson have reacted angrily
to news that the senior civil servant Sue Gray has been offered a job as Chief
of Staff to the Labour leader Sikir Starmer. Ms Gray led the investigation into
lockdown parties at Downing Street. At the time, she was praised by Mr Johnson
and his ministers as the most impartial of civil servants. The Deputy Chairman
of the Conservative Party Lee Anderson has told the BBC he sympathises with
people who protested outside hotels housing asylum seekers. Some of the
demonstrations led to arrests for violent behaviour. Mr Anderson said protesters
were normal family people upset by changes to their community. The Chief
Executive of the HS2 High Speed Rail link Mark Thurston has told the BBC various
options are being considered to control the project's spiralling costs in the
face of high inflation. Mr Thurston said construction could be delayed or parts
of the line cut to save money. The government says it's committed to delivering
the project from London to Manchester. Scotland has banned hospitals from using
the anaesthetic desfluorine because of its environmental risks. It's the first
country to implement such a measure. Desfluorine is a powerful greenhouse gas
which NHS analysis shows is 2,500 times more potent than carbon dioxide. The
drug will now only be used in exceptional circumstances. A similar ban is coming
in England next year. Jane, thank you. It's now 28 minutes to seven. Is Keir
Starmer's decision to invite the woman who investigated Partygate to be his new
Chief of Staff proof that he's taking the prospect of power seriously or of a
civil service that is not impartial and that conspired to bring Boris Johnson
down? Once again, the name Sue Gray is at the centre of a political row. We talk
about that with our political correspondent, Jonathan Blake. Morning to you,
Jonathan. This job offer has enraged some Conservatives, hasn't it? Morning,
Nick. Yes, it has. We're told Sir Keir Starmer is delighted that Sue Gray hopes
to accept the role as his Chief of Staff and join Labour's preparations for
government but not everyone is delighted, as you say, particularly some
Conservatives who are outraged at a move they say undermines her report, which
we remember found that parties and events in Downing Street shouldn't have been
allowed during lockdown and that politicians and officials should bear
responsibility for that, something that Boris Johnson said at the time he was
humbled by and had learned lessons from. Now, though, Cabinet ministers who'd
served under him, Jacob Rees-Mogg and Nadine Doris, both saying that Sue Gray's
report now looks like a stitch-up. The Vice-Chair of the Conservative Party, one
of them, Paul Holmes, said that this is an inappropriate appointment which
should be blocked and a representative for Boris Johnson himself said the
validity of Sue Gray's findings had now been destroyed. There are rules that
should be followed here. The Cabinet Office says it's reviewing the
circumstances under which Sue Gray resigned. She will have to wait at least
three months before taking up this job if she does and the watchdog on business
appointments, ACOBA, will advise the Prime Minister if there's anything
inappropriate here but even if he takes a dim view of it there isn't really
anything he can do to block her taking the role. Well, there is talk of him
being at least able to delay her taking up the role. What are his powers? Well,
he can rule against an appointment which a civil servant decides to take up
after leaving their post but given that she has resigned and left the service, I
think the expectation is that she would wait the required three months before
taking up a job and then there wouldn't really be anything that anyone, even the
Prime Minister, could do about it. I suppose the question is, given Sue Gray's
reputation for integrity and doing things by the book and following the rules,
if there was any question at an official level over her appointment, would she
still take up that role? Sakhir Starmer's team seem relaxed about the
controversy, they expected this reaction and that they say it's right, she goes
through the process and they're doing this by the book. What they do object to
is any sense that this is inappropriate and any questioning of Sue Gray's
integrity because as far as they're concerned this is not about getting any
inside information but understanding how government works and using her
experience to prepare for, as one official put it, hitting the ground running.
Jonathan Blake, thank you very much indeed. We're going to be talking to a
Labour frontbencher at 10 to 8 and one of Boris Johnson's supporters who is not
impressed. 25 to 7 now, the parents of the baby whose body was found close to
allotments in Brighton will appear before magistrates today. Aruna Iyengar
correspondent is here in the studio. What are the charges against them, Aruna?
Yes, Constance Martin and Mark Gordon have been charged with gross negligence
manslaughter, they were charged yesterday. They've also been charged with
concealing a birth of a child and perverting the course of justice and the pair
will appear at Crawley Magistrates later today. This is after a baby's remains
were found on Wednesday afternoon in a wooded area of Hollingbury which is to
the north of Brighton. The local community have been very much affected by this.
Last night people in Brighton were leaving flowers and messages on a road close
to where the baby was found so really a sense of desolation really for the
community there. The fact that the police said that they have not been able to
even determine whether the baby was a boy or a girl gives us probably some
indication of the state of the remains. Do we know when the baby was born? Well
it's believed that the baby was born in early January. Yesterday the police said
that they didn't know the gender of the baby. They also said the baby may have
been dead for some time. The infant's not yet been formally identified. A post-
mortem is due to take place later today so we'll know a bit more about that
later. The finding of the baby follows the arrest of the couple on Monday. They
were spotted by members of the public in a convenience store in Brighton. The
police were alerted and they were arrested shortly afterwards in North Brighton.
The police have been trying to find them and the baby for some weeks and then
after their arrest there was a major search which took place around the Brighton
area to find the baby. More than 200 officers were involved. They were searching
allotments, woodland and open ground around Brighton, New Haven and the South
Downs. The police have been looking for the couple since their car caught fire
on the M61 motorway near Bolton and it was left abandoned and they travelled all
around the country after that. They'd been living really off grid and quite
isolated and so that's where we are at the moment. We're likely to find out more
about the baby later today. Thanks Aruna. 22 minutes to seven. Let's look at the
front pages. That story about Sue Gray on a couple of front pages. The mail is
this proof the Partygate probe was a Labour plot. The Times PM urged to block
new job for Party Inquisitor with one source close to Rishi Sunak saying the
Prime Minister believes passionately in the principle of civil service
impartiality would not countenance anything that would compromise that. The
Telegraph leading once again on its revelations of Matt Hancock's WhatsApp
messages. We're going to have to get heavy with the police is its headline which
is one of those messages from Matt Hancock. He talks at one stage of the plot
got there. Marching orders. We're going to be talking about that with a former
Chief Constable soon. And there are aides of Matt Hancock quoted as saying they
could lock up Nigel Farage after he tweeted a photo of himself drinking a beer
in an apparent breach of quarantine rules. There's also an exchange that the
Telegraph has revealed between Matt Hancock and Simon Case the country's top
civil servant permanent secretary at the Cabinet Office relating to putting
people in hotel quarantine. You'll remember that was the system for people
coming back from red list countries. We are giving families all the sweets and
putting pop stars in the box from says Matt Hancock. And then Simon Case says I
just want to see some of the faces of people coming out of first class and into
a premier in shoebox. When the barrister Adam Wagner saw this he's written a
book about laws during Covid. He says this exchange sounds callous. I spoke out
a lot during the pandemic about conditions in hotel quarantine more than 200000
people kept in small rooms often with 15 minutes exercise per day. Many children
disabled people people who should have given been given medical exemptions were
among them. The front page of the Mirror and of the Sun have the same idea which
is to put the photographs of all the victims of the Manchester Arena bombing on
their front page. The headline on the Mirror is failed. More agony as MI5 chief
admits missed chances to stop attack that left 22 dead. It reports the Sun
headline is stark 22 who should be alive. And inside the Guardian there's the
story after the sentencing yesterday of a woman with cerebral palsy who was a
pedestrian on a pavement where a 77 year old cyclist was cycling on the
pavement. She shouted and waved her arm aggressively at her causing her to fall
into the path of an oncoming car and she was then killed. The pedestrian has
been jailed for three years for manslaughter. Her representing lawyer said that
that this woman's view that cyclists should cycle on the road where pavements
are narrow was why she'd done what she'd done. There'd been no intention to
cause harm nor was there an obvious risk of harm and that people said that the
woman the pedestrian seemed childlike. Cambridgeshire police said this is a
difficult and tragic case but what is clear that the pedestrian's response was
totally disproportionate and ultimately found to be unlawful and resulting in
the cyclist's death. Interesting sign of the political times that Boris Johnson
yesterday saying that the deal that his successor had done on the Northern
Ireland Protocol did not take back control from the EU makes it only onto one
front page. Daily Express, Boris, Rishi's deal will not take back control. Time
now, 19 minutes to seven. Our main news this morning, energy firms have
suggested the government will maintain some level of support for household bills
beyond April when the current assistance is due to finish. The Treasury said it
won't comment on speculation. We'll be talking to Simon Jack about that in about
20 minutes time but now to the aftermath of a BBC investigation a few days ago
which showed sex offenders changing their names and then disappearing off police
radar. MPs then called yesterday for the law to be tightened up. Sean Curran
reports. There are around 67,000 registered sex offenders in the UK. They're
legally required to tell the police about any change in their personal details.
That includes changing their name and address. Figures obtained by the
Safeguarding Alliance show that between 2019 and 2022 more than 11,500 people
were prosecuted for failing to keep the police up to date. The Labour MP Sarah
Champion has long campaigned for a change in the law. Whilst it's clear that
offenders are changing their names and not disclosing their new name to the
police, the exact scale of the problem remains impossible to capture. It's
important to emphasise these are only the cases we know about. There could have
been many more offenders who breached their notification requirements without
the police's knowledge. Offenders are also required to visit a police station to
comply with notification requirements but only once a year. As survivors of
abuse and sexual assault looked on from the gallery, Sarah Champion argued that
a system that relied on registered sex offenders to report changes put the
public at risk. Della Wright, a survivor of child sexual abuse who has waived
her right to anonymity, wants sex offenders to be banned from changing their
name once they're added to the register. Campaigners have called her proposals
Della's law. Sarah Champion said Ms Wright's abuser had changed his name at
least five times. When Della's case was finally brought to court, he once again
changed his name, this time in between being charged and appearing in court for
the plea hearing. This slowed down the whole process as new court papers needed
to be submitted in the new name. This additional distress to Della made a
complete mockery of the justice system. A Conservative, Lucy Allen, highlighted
the case of a child sex offender who changed their name by deed poll and their
gender identity from a man to a woman whilst serving a 15 year prison sentence.
This child sex offender is no longer Clive Bundy. This person has changed their
name by deed poll and this person has changed their gender identity. Under the
law, Clive Bundy no longer exists. Clive Bundy has chosen the name of Claire
Fox. She said their victim, who was one of her constituents, feared the new
identity would erase her experience. The rights of victims and the vulnerable
matter more than the rights of serial child sex offenders. We all know that is
the case. Another Conservative, Mark Fletcher, said allowing registered sex
offenders to change their name created a ludicrous loophole in the law. Two
years ago, the government promised to carry out a review into the scale of the
problem but it hasn't been published. Mark Fletcher said the refusal to make the
report public was a slap in the face for victims and survivors. This problem
needs to be fixed. The rights of sex offenders and the rights to be able to
change your name do not trump safeguarding in this country. A Labour MP, Paula
Barker, said the current legislation was effectively redundant and accused the
Home Office of dragging its feet. Every day that goes by and we in this place
fail to act, we are betraying the bravery and tenacity of survivors like Della
Rice and those whose voices we are yet to hear. Quite frankly, that should be
something that shames us all. And a Liberal Democrat, Vera Hobhouse, said sex
offenders used new names to pass cheques and get jobs working with children and
young people. We cannot say that we have delivered justice for survivors if the
perpetrators are left to secretly carry on their crimes. Abuse never leaves its
victims. So sex offenders should never be able to walk away from their crimes in
such a way that leaves them free to commit new appalling crimes. The
safeguarding minister at the Home Office, Sarah Dines, called the current regime
one of the most robust in the world but she said in her view it didn't go far
enough. She said the promised review into the issue had been completed and she
and the Home Secretary were considering the findings. The minister didn't say if
the report would be published and told MPs that some of the material was very
sensitive. Sean Curran reporting. There you can hear more on Yesterday in
Parliament at Harper State on digital and longwave. Time now is 14 minutes to
seven. Judges investigating war crimes in Ukraine are being trained by Britain
to help them cope with the vast and growing caseload of allegations of
atrocities being carried out by Russian soldiers. The UK is also supporting
Ukrainian calls for the creation of a new tribunal which would be needed if
Vladimir Putin and those close to him are ever to face trial for their actions.
The Attorney General has been to Ukraine to meet with the country's Prosecutor
General and to visit the sites of the atrocities. I spoke to Attorney Victoria
Prentice and the Prosecutor General Andrei Kostin in Kiev about what they'd
seen. We've had a fairly horrific set of visits today, most recently to Bucha
where we stood on top of the grave. Your listeners will remember those pits that
were dug with many, many bodies in them almost exactly a year ago. And we laid
wreaths in memory of the people who died. And we were then able to talk to the
mayor of the town and to the priest of the church where many of those bodies
were buried and to listen to the stories of those who survived. We've always
been very clear that we have to do everything we can to make sure that the
Ukrainians are supported in prosecuting these crimes. Andrei Kostin, you are
pursuing war crimes in the Ukrainian courts. Can you give us a sense of the
scale of the work that you're doing? The scale is so massive that it couldn't be
somehow compared to what Europe has seen in last year. So we can only compare
this to the atrocities the world has seen during the Second World War. At the
moment, we have registered and started investigation in more than 70,000
incidents of war crimes committed during this one year. And all types of war
crimes were committed in Bucha, which was willful killing of civilians, torture
and ill treatment, sexual violence, looting, forced deportation of Ukrainians to
Belarus and Russia. So anything you can imagine was committed in Bucha. And what
was also important for us all to understand when we in September liberated
Kharkiv and in November Kherson, we found the same types of war crimes, the same
atrocities. These are shocking incidents, Mr. Kostin, but on a vast scale, is
Ukraine able during a war to document all these incidents? Do you have the court
system, the judges that you need to do that? How can Britain help with that?
Britain is already helping us. I will start with the initiative of British
government and my personal adviser, Sir Howard Morrison, who is also here today,
whose team is now training Ukrainian judges to try these cases. And at the
moment, we have already 26 convicted Russian war criminals by Ukrainian courts.
So we are working hard during wartime. And this is very important for us to feel
the real support. What cases are appropriate for Ukraine to prosecute? What is
appropriate to go to the Hague, the ICC, the International Criminal Court? Well,
we're absolutely certain that what Ukraine is doing at the moment in terms of
prosecuting the vast majority of these cases and in documenting and saving and
safeguarding all the evidence is absolutely right. I'm sure, though, that one
day there will need to be a moment of international accountability. And Karim
Khan from the ICC is here in Ukraine this week. We're having really useful
discussions about what sorts of indictments he will be bringing and we will
continue to work together. I know that Ukraine believes there may be the need
for a tribunal above and beyond the International Criminal Court to prosecute
Vladimir Putin, if possible, those closest to him for planning and executing the
invasion of Ukraine. Why do you believe another process is needed? We believe
and we are standing for our doctrine of comprehensive accountability of the
aggressor state. But for legal reasons, for legal restrictions, the
International Criminal Court can brought them to justice only for war crimes,
crimes against humanity and crime of genocide. But we can't forget and we can't
leave aside the crime of aggression, the primary crime, because if aggression
would not have been occurred, there would be no 70,000 incidents of war crime.
There would be no hundreds of civilians killed in Bucha and thousands of them
killed throughout Ukraine. Let me turn finally to the Attorney General Victoria
Prentiss. This is not merely professional for you, is it? There's a personal
connection between your family and Ukraine. Why do you care so much about it? We
really love Ukraine. My daughter lived here until just before the outbreak of
war. In fact, she lived just around the corner from the office I'm sitting in
now. And I came to visit her three months before the war started. And we ate
out, we had our nails done together, we went to the ballet, we talked about
climate change. And I really, really want to get back to that. Victoria
Prentiss, Attorney General, Prosecutor General Andrei Kostin. Thank you very
much for joining us from Kyiv. The time is now seven minutes to seven. The
senior civil servant given the job of investigating Boris Johnson and other
senior conservatives looks set to now be going to work for Keir Starmer as his
Chief of Staff, a key role within the Labour leader's office. At least that is
the job she's been offered. And she has resigned from the civil service. Alex
Thomas is from the Institute for Government think tank. Morning, Alex. Good
morning, Michelle. You've been a civil servant yourself. Can you see why this
job offer to Sue Gray is enraging many conservatives? I suppose I sort of I can
and I can't. I don't think they have a good argument when they talk about the
Partygate report or call into question Sue Gray's record as a civil servant. I
mean, I worked with Sue and always saw her behave entirely impartially and
equally robustly with ministers and political advisors of any party. Also, of
course, it's not the case that it was the Partygate report that triggered the
fall of Boris Johnson. And if anything, the accusation against Sue Gray there
was that she aimed off a bit from criticising personally the former prime
minister. But I do understand the context. Just one minute on that, because
Partygate was clearly one of the important issues in that period, was it not?
Yes, of course it was. I don't want to minimise the importance of that. But I
mean, I do think I was going to say I do think this is unusual. It's surprising.
Although civil servants have crossed the aisle before Jonathan Powell, Tony
Blair or others. I mean, it hasn't happened before with the civil servant who
was still serving of this seniority and with the public profile and sort of
career history in the deep centre of government that Sue Gray has. But
particularly because of her role in that position of investigating Boris Johnson
and others, which is why many people, not just conservatives, are left
wondering, did she do that from a politically partial position when she reached
the conclusion that the leadership at the centre, both political and official,
had to bear responsibility for the culture of the parties? Was she completely
impartial? I would say yes, she was. I mean, the parties happened. I think to
say that she wasn't completely impartial is to misunderstand how civil servants
work. It's completely fine for civil servants to have their own personal views.
But when they take on the job, they put those views to one side and do the job
without fear or favour. So I understand the context. I do think this raises
quite tricky questions for the civil service in the long term about the trust of
relationship between ministers and civil servants. I think it's very important
that the ACABA, this Committee on Business Appointments process is followed
clearly and properly. I think it's in Kirstarma's interest for that to happen as
well. They can make a recommendation on a gap, a cooling off period between
leaving the civil service and taking up a new job? They can, yes. So this
committee that's chaired by Lord Pickles, the Conservative peer, can make
various recommendations, including the waiting period before Sue Gray takes up
this appointment. Do you think it should be the maximum? Well, yeah, but it can
be two years, can't it? I wonder if you think in order to maintain or improve
confidence in the civil service, it should be the maximum. It can be two years.
I think it's normally three months, sometimes six months. I would say it's
reasonable for it to be at the sort of higher end of the normal approach, so six
months, 12 months. Two years feels a little bit disproportionate to me, but
obviously the committee will look at that and take a view in the round. And then
actually it is of course for Rishi Sunak, the Prime Minister, to sign that off
in the end. But it's only advice? It's only advice. One of the problems, we've
often criticised the ACOBA process because it's so unenforceable, it's pretty
toothless. I do think in this circumstance, because Keir Starmer has rightly
made a lot of his promise about honesty, integrity mattering, I think if the
committee is sort of seen to behave reasonably and not being punitive, then it
would be very hard for Keir Starmer and Sue Gray not to follow its advice. So I
think that the teeth on this occasion are a little bit sharper than they might
normally be. Alex Thomas, thank you. Three minutes to seven, time for the
weather. Helen Willetts. Nick, thank you very much. Hello, good morning. Air
high pressure is with us again, so for many it's dry, but we've got a lot of
cloud this morning, more than we had yesterday, for example, in England and
Wales. So the best of the sunshine this morning will be around the Irish Sea
coast, perhaps the south coast of England, but that will tend to fill in with
cloud as the day goes on. A few breaks possible with a bit more breeze though
coming into eastern parts of England, East Anglia and the southeast potentially
into the afternoon. I think for Wales, for the Midlands, for southern England,
northwest England, a lot more cloud than yesterday generally. And there's a
little bit of rain around or light showers from those cloudier skies in the
north. So it feels chilly, seven or eight degrees Celsius, but 10 if we do keep
the sunshine. Northern Ireland also have a lot of cloud this morning. Could be a
little bit of frost and fog where the cloud stays broke or has stayed broken,
particularly near the north. But I think we'll be limited brightness today, just
a few scattered showers around temperatures of six or seven degrees Celsius and
a very similar picture for Scotland. The best of the sunshine today, the western
fringes up in the north and the northern isles, just one or two showers here,
mostly in the south and the west. Just a lot of cloud making it feel quite
chilly at six or seven degrees after the frosty start in places as well. Helen,
thank you very much. And now to what's coming up later today. On BBC Radio 4. We
are all a unique accumulation of our own unique experiences and knowledge. The
poet Lem Sissay looks at uniqueness. Rainfall like applause is utterly unique
every time it happens. Reflecting on the occasions he's stood out. In a room
full of graduates, people without degrees can sometimes get defensive about it.
Not me! Lem Sissay is the one and only. He'll like it all. Starting this morning
at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Coming up in the next hour, a former chief
constable gives his reaction to Matt Hancock's leaked message about getting
heavy with the police. What exactly is happening with HS2? Not so much high
speed as very slow. Nick, academic looking into why DJs all day long.