TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 You know, hello, Mama. Hello, Papa. I am well ready to lose my life in the
service of the country and all the rest of it. And I think these were absolutely
genuine. The Newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio
station. It's two hours, GMT. I'm Charlotte Gallagher, and this is The Newsroom.
As two US citizens kidnapped in Mexico are found dead, our correspondent there
explains the dangers of areas controlled by drug cartels. Organised crime
activity, including gun battles, murder, armed robbery, carjacking, kidnapping,
forced disappearance, extortion and sexual assault is common. Do we finally have
an answer to one of the most mysterious events linked to the invasion of
Ukraine? Also... Jimmy would message me every day. If I was sad in my
interactions with my husband, he was always there. The cruelty, brutality and
profits of online romance scams and... One of the biggest singles of the 1980s
celebrates its birthday. First, the news. BBC News, hello. I'm Gareth Barlow.
Protests in the Georgian capital, Tbilisi, have carried late into the night
against proposed legislation requiring organisations that receive funding from
abroad to register as foreign agents. Police used water cannon and tear gas to
try to disperse protesters who'd gathered outside Parliament. The Georgian
President, Salome Zorbishevili, gave her support to the protesters. I am by your
side. Today you represent a free Georgia. Georgia, which sees its future in
Europe, will not allow anyone to take that away. That future belongs to our next
generation, and no one has the right to take that away. No one needed this law.
It does not come from anywhere if not at the behest of Moscow. It should be
revoked. From the very first day, I said that I would use my veto against it,
and I will. The UN Refugee Agency has called on lawmakers here in Britain to
reconsider draft laws that would detain and deport people arriving by boat to
claim asylum. The UNHCR said the measures violated both the letter and spirit of
the Refugees Convention by punishing asylum seekers who don't enter the country
at an official border point. Vicky Tennant is the agency's representative to the
United Kingdom. We are very concerned as the UN, refugee agency. This is
effectively closing off access to asylum in the UK for people arriving
irregularly. We believe it's a clear breach of the Refugee Convention. And
remember, even people with very compelling claims will simply not have the
opportunity to put these forward. The British Prime Minister insists the
legislation is the only way to deter people making the journey by sea. The White
House has called for a referendum on the draft law. The White House says it
supports a bipartisan bill in Congress that will give President Biden new powers
to ban the Chinese-owned app TikTok and other foreign technologies that could
pose security threats. The White House National Security Advisor said the bill
would help protect American sensitive data from certain foreign governments. The
Democratic Senator Mark Warner is among those supporting the legislation. Over
the past several years, foreign technology products from adversarial nations,
and when I say adversarial nations, I'm specifically citing China, Russia, North
Korea, Iran, Cuba and Venezuela, have really tried to establish a foothold in
American markets. Today, everybody's talking about TikTok and the ability of
that platform to be used by the Communist Party, both to take on data, but also
potentially as a malign influence and propaganda tool. Five women have sued the
American state of Texas, saying they were denied abortions even though their
lives were in danger. It follows last year's Supreme Court ruling that removed
constitutional protection for abortion rights. The women want the state to
clarify that doctors can provide abortions in cases where continuing the
pregnancy is unsafe. World News from the BBC. Cyclone Freddie is expected to
make landfall again in Mozambique later this week, after it struck Madagascar
for a second time on Monday, bringing strong winds and torrential rain.
Madagascar's government says eight people were killed and more than a thousand
homes destroyed. The storm first wreaked havoc in southeastern Africa in late
February. A BBC World Service investigation has revealed how criminal gangs
across Southeast Asia are trafficking migrants and forcing them to carry out
online romance scans targeting victims around the world. Jake Tackey reports.
People around the world have lost hundreds of millions of dollars to this
sophisticated scam in recent years, but we have found that many of those
involved are victims themselves. One former scammer told the BBC that he was
lured with the promise of a good job before being trafficked and held in a
casino compound in Cambodia, where he was forced to scam. He said he had to
approach a hundred potential scam victims in Europe and the US every day. In
video diaries, secretly recorded inside his compound, he said that those who
disobeyed the gangs or failed to hit their targets were subjected to severe
beatings. Brazilian and Portuguese police have jointly dismounted a sham company
that defrauded thousands of Brazilians, some of whom lost their life savings.
Six people have been arrested. Brazilian police said it was started by a Czech
national based in Lisbon, who opened a call centre and recruited low-paid
Brazilian workers in the city to phone people in Brazil and convince them to
invest in stocks. And scientists here in Britain have found that bumblebees
learn to solve puzzles by watching their more experienced peers. Experts from
Queen Mary University of London trained a set of bees to open a puzzle box
containing a sugar reward. These bees then passed on the knowledge to others in
their colonies. Researchers said that their studies showed that not only
instinct but also social learning played a large role in the societies of bees,
ants and also of wasps. That's the latest BBC News. Hello, you're listening to
the Newsroom from the BBC World Service with me, Charlotte Gallagher. The
kidnapping of four US citizens in Mexico has been dominating headlines on both
sides of the border for the past 24 hours. A major hunt was launched after the
group were taken by armed men in the city of Matamoros. Video showed them being
forced into a pickup truck after a shootout. A Mexican woman standing nearby was
shot dead. On Tuesday, the group were found but two had been killed. Karine
Jean-Pierre is the White House spokeswoman. We will continue to work closely
with the Mexican government to ensure justice is done in this case. Since day
one of this administration, we have been focused on disrupting transnational
criminal organisations, including Mexican drug cartels, and we have imposed
powerful new sanctions against cartel organisations in recent weeks. Our
correspondent in Mexico, Will Grant, has been giving me the latest. Well, it
does appear that what happened to these US citizens is that they decided to
enter Mexico, to go to the city of Matamoros for what's being described as a
cosmetic health procedure for one of them. And it seemed that as a group of
friends, they went down to the city to accompany her ahead of that cosmetic
surgery. The person who was going to have that was a 33-year-old woman called
Lativia Tay McGee, and she was accompanied by three friends, Shahid Woodard,
Zindel Brown and Eric Williams. And then all four of them, travelling in a
minivan, found themselves caught in the sort of worst possible circumstances of
the Mexican drug war, a firefight between warring factions of the Gulf cartel.
We're not sure entirely if any were killed on the scene or died later from their
injuries, but certainly there is unconfirmed video of all four of them being
taken away. Now it's been confirmed that two were killed, two survived, one of
them was injured, and all four, both dead and alive, are back in the United
States now. And how were they found? Well, I believe that the level of intensity
that came down on this group that kidnapped them must have either brought tip-
offs or simply created the conditions that they knew it wasn't going to be very
wise to hold onto them for much longer. Once it was clear that these were in
fact US citizens, we saw that there was a coordinated effort between the FBI and
federal agencies from Mexico, the Mexican intelligence services, and of course
the state forces as well. And with that level of intensity, I think that the
cartel, if it was indeed cartel gunmen who took them, probably considered quite
simply that it wasn't good for business to be holding American citizens and they
were, I'm not sure if released is the word, but the authorities located them.
And you mentioned yesterday that Matamoros is not a place that tourists would be
recommended to go, it's very dangerous and there's a cartel war going on there.
Yeah, I mean we can take a look at the US State Department's travel warning for
Tamaulipas. Essentially it warns US citizens against travel to the state where,
as it puts it, organized crime activity including gun battles, murder, armed
robbery, carjacking, kidnapping, forced disappearance, extortion and sexual
assault is common along the northern border. So that gives you a sense of just
how dangerous the state of Tamaulipas is. Matamoros itself as a city is
incredibly dangerous and the fact that this sort of gunfight could unfold in
broad daylight shows just how dangerous things are, lest we forget there was a
Mexican bystander who was killed too. She was a woman who was simply in the
wrong place at the wrong time. 35,000 murders a year in Mexico last year, that
compares to about 20,000 in 2015, which critics of the president suggest say
that it shows the country's on the wrong path. That was Will Grant in Mexico.
Last September, one of the most mysterious events linked to the invasion of
Ukraine took place. It didn't happen on the battlefield and it wasn't in
Ukraine, but deep beneath the Baltic Sea when explosions ripped through the Nord
Stream gas pipelines, linking Russia to the West. Denmark, Poland and Sweden say
they believe leaks in two major Russian gas pipelines to Europe are the result
of sabotage. Seismologists reported underwater blasts before the leaks emerged
and Ukraine has accused Russia of causing the leaks. Many were quick to blame
the Russians. But why would Moscow want to sabotage its own pipelines at an
estimated cost of $500 million when it had other, simpler ways of controlling
the gas flow to Europe? On Tuesday evening, US officials told the New York Times
there was evidence suggesting a pro-Ukrainian group was behind the attack.
Separately, German media is reporting that investigators there believe they've
identified the boat used to plant the explosives. The Ukrainian authorities have
denied any involvement. Julian Barnes is the New York Times' national security
reporter. We've had officials tell us that this sabotage act was done by an
independent group, not by a government, but a group that is aligned with
Ukraine, a group that is opposed to Vladimir Putin of Russia. And the
information that the intelligence that the US has right now indicates that the
Ukraine government didn't know about this. President Zelensky had no knowledge
of this. Now, of course, one could learn something different later on, but for
now, the US does not think that the Ukrainian government had anything to do with
it. It's an independent group. Officials wouldn't discuss the nature of the
intelligence, who collected it, how they got it. US officials, like any
intelligence professional, try to keep their sources and methods very close to
the vest. We do know that the group of people here likely included Ukrainians.
It might have included Russians. The exact mix is not clear. They also used
divers, according to the intelligence they have. I think it's very important to
note that the reporters of The New York Times, and I presume my colleagues in
Germany, have been working on this story since September, since the pipeline
blew up. A lot of times we've seen in this war sort of controlled leaks,
information that is declassified and then released to the public, a government
wanting to have an effect. That's not what's going on here. This is
investigative reporting that people are sort of digging out. We have not been
able to confirm the German reporting yet, but it is very much in alignment with
what we were reporting. And so I think that this is journalists working hard,
doing their job. Julian Barnes from The New York Times. The British government
has set out plans to stop people crossing the English Channel in small boats
from France. Last year, more than 45,000 migrants made the journey. Under these
new proposals, anyone who enters on a boat will not be able to claim asylum.
Instead, they will be detained, removed to what is deemed to be a safe country,
and barred from re-entry. The British Prime Minister, Rishi Sunak, said the
proposals were tough, but necessary and fair. Now I understand there will be
debate about the toughness of these measures. All I can say is, we have tried it
every other way and it has not worked. So I say again, my policy is very simple.
It is this country and your government who should decide who comes here, not
criminal gangs. But the UN Refugee Agency says it's profoundly concerned by the
plans. It says they will deny protection to many asylum seekers, breach the UN
Refugee Convention and undermine Britain's humanitarian tradition. Matt
Saltmarch is from the UNHCR. It looks very much like an asylum ban. We're
concerned about the impact that that will have on refugees and asylum seekers.
We're also concerned about the impact that that will have as a signal to the
rest of the world in terms of the UK's role and its responsibilities. And also,
I suppose, its tradition as a country that has generously welcomed refugees,
asylum seekers, those fleeing war and persecution in the past. Even the UK Home
Secretary has admitted there's more than a 50% chance that the new legislation
will be incompatible with international law. Critics say that with no legal safe
routes, it won't have an impact on the numbers coming. Our correspondent Lucy
Williamson went to migrant camps near Calais in France to find out. A policy
designed for impact had little impact in the camps of northern France. Those
that were aware of the new UK policy said it made as little difference to their
plans as the policies that came before it. So nothing here. UK, whatever they
do, we are going there. Omar was sitting with friends around a small fire in the
Sudanese camp in Calais. I never stop. I never stop. We are never give up. On
the outskirts of the camp, Salah watched his friends play football. I will go
England. He told me he'd prefer prison in the UK to freedom here in France. If
they send people to Rwanda, will you still try and go to the UK? Yes, I will go
UK. That's my ambition, my dream. I will not return in Rwanda if that is
happening. I can kill myself in England, but I am not returning to Africa,
Rwanda. Aid workers say they've seen a rise in suicides among migrants here over
the past few years as immigration policies have tightened and conditions in the
camps have worsened. But for many people here, policy announcements alone won't
dim the appeal of British shores. Lucy Williamson in Calais. Last year, the US
Supreme Court overturned the constitutional right for women to seek an abortion.
Since then, many American states, including Texas, have imposed bans or
restrictions. Now a number of women in Texas are challenging those changes in
court, saying they've caused them serious harm. One of them, Lauren Miller,
spoke on the steps of the courthouse in the city of Austin. Politicians in Texas
are prohibiting health care that they don't understand. They could do something,
but they're not. And it's killing us. How is it that I can get an abortion for a
dog, but not for me? Today's legal challenge in Texas is just the latest move in
an ongoing battle between pro and anti-abortion supporters in the US. Our
Washington correspondent, Nomi Rickbell, has more. It was really powerful
testimony from these women who have been basically denied, they say, their right
to have an abortion, given that they say their lives were at risk, their fetuses
were at risk as well. And standing with them was Nancy Northup. She's the
president and the head of the Center for Reproductive Rights. It's a group
that's dedicated to abortion rights. And she made the point that the lawsuit's
the first of its kind since Roe v. Wade was overturned. And she was very blunt
as well. She said it's now dangerous to be pregnant in Texas and said no one
should be forced to wait at death's door to receive health care. Also, she said
that these women she was representing was only the tip of the iceberg. It's
really important to stress what these women are after is not an overturning of
abortion in Texas. What they want is clarity. When the state of Texas banned
abortion, they said there are exceptions. These women are basically saying, what
are the exceptions and under what conditions? After Roe v. Wade was overturned,
I remember speaking to those groups who believe in abortion rights. And they
made a point of saying that about a third of women of reproductive age in the
US, after Roe v. Wade is overturned, will live more than an hour away from the
closest abortion facility, that the number of facilities that actively offer
abortion care would be cut by about 10. So if you live in Texas, you are
surrounded by states that are hostile to abortion. So you're going to have to
travel somewhere, maybe Illinois. And that's only if you can afford it. The
polls still suggest that most Americans do believe in abortion rights, and
especially when it comes to those who need it because their lives are at risk.
So in some ways, this was the women's way of saying to them, look, we are very
ordinary, everyday women, all of them wanted to have the children. They didn't
fit the so called stereotypes that maybe people have about women who have an
abortion. So this was their way of showing the public this is affecting normal
everyday women who wanted determination, not because they wanted to get rid of
the pregnancy, but because their lives and the life of the fetus was at risk.
Nomura Iqbal, you're listening to the BBC World Service. Online romance scams
can be big business with some victims losing thousands, even millions of
dollars. The BBC has been speaking to people in Southeast Asia who took part in
the scams. They've revealed the sophisticated techniques they used and the
brutal conditions unwilling scammers were forced to work under. Jowin Fung
reports. A whispered plea for help. I'm a Chinese man trapped in a scam compound
in Cambodia. Didi, not his real name, left China for the promise of a well-paid
job. Instead, he was trafficked to Cambodia, locked up in a compound and forced
by criminal gangs to carry out an online romance scam known as pig butchering.
I'm recording this video secretly from inside the bathroom. In the scam, victims
are known as pigs. Scammers use fake online profiles to groom them before
tricking them to invest in fake financial exchanges. Didi worked 12-hour days
targeting people in America and Europe under the constant threat of violence.
Someone in my team made a mistake today. He was beaten up in front of everyone,
then dragged out of the office. Videos shared with the BBC by activist networks
show the type of violence Didi witnessed is common in scam compounds. This is
Xiaozui, not his real name. He's a former scam boss. He's wearing a mask to
avoid reprisals from criminal gangs. He says he made hundreds of thousands of
dollars running a scam operation, even writing a guide for other scammers to
follow, but that he now regrets his actions. The pig butchering scam is all
about using emotion. That's how you win their trust. The profiles we make up are
always very handsome, rich, responsible and caring. It was a profile just like
this that Cindy fell for. The scammers stole the identity of an innocent social
media influencer from South Korea to target her with. Jimmy came at a time when
I was the most vulnerable in my entire life. Cindy Tsai is a successful
businesswoman based in Boston in the US. At the time, she was going through a
divorce and had just found out she had terminal cancer. Jimmy would message me
every day. If I was sad in my interactions with my husband, he was always there.
When my husband and I had decided that we were going to divorce, that's when it
switched to much more of a romantic relationship. After seducing Cindy, Jimmy
tricked her into investing more than $2 million on a fake cryptocurrency
platform. Despite the large amount that I lost, I actually believe that I've
been luckier than most. I've given the scammers enough of my time, I've given
enough of my money, and I absolutely refuse to give them who I actually am.
After four months in captivity, Didi managed to escape and make it back home to
China. We approached the owner of the compound where Didi was being held for
comment, but he did not respond. Hundreds of gangs continue to carry out the pig
butchering scam from compounds across Southeast Asia, targeting people all over
the world. That was Jowyn Fung. Time for the latest sports news now. Here's Paul
Saris. Chelsea are into the quarterfinals of the Champions League after a 2-0
win over Borussia Dortmund in the second leg of their last 16 tie. The BBC's
football correspondent John Murray reports from Stamford Bridge. The Champions
League could prove to be the salvation of Graham Potter as the Chelsea manager.
His team may be marooned in mid-table in the Premier League, but in Europe, the
team is still in the top ten. They won their group before the World Cup and won
through by doing what they had to do, scoring two goals in a game for the first
time in 13 matches. Raheem Sterling rode his luck after a missed kick to shoot
Chelsea in front just before half-time. And early in the second half, the big
moment. A VAR-assisted decision for a penalty for handball. It was debatable.
Chelsea's new spot kick-taker Kai Havertz hit the post, but VAR intervened
again. The penalty was retaken, and this time Havertz found the bottom corner.
So Dortmund, who had won every match they'd played in 2023, are out, and Chelsea
are enjoying their best moment yet under their manager of only six months.
Chelsea manager Graham Potter was delighted with the victory. Fantastic
atmosphere, fantastic evening. Players were tremendous, the supporters were
tremendous. We had to be against a team that are doing so well. Ten games on the
bounce winning, but I think over the two games, I think we've deserved to go
through. Elsewhere, Benfica thrash club Bruges 5-1 on the night and 7-1 on
aggregate to reach the last eight. Meanwhile, Spurs welcome Milan to the
Tottenham Hotspur Stadium later on Wednesday, one nil down from their first leg.
Elsewhere, PSG go to Bayern with a one nil deficit from their match in Paris.
Tennis, and one of the biggest tournaments outside of the four Grand Slams, gets
underway on Wednesday. At Indian Wells, Carlos Alcaraz can become the world
number one if he wins the title, with Novak Djokovic absent from the tournament.
And the top three golfers in the world have been grouped together for the
opening two rounds of this week's Players' Championship at Sawgrass in Florida.
Spain's John Rahm has won five of his past ten tournaments and is the world
number one, but second ranked Scotty Scheffler or Rory McIlroy, who is third,
can take top spot with a win. That was Paul Sarras. For many of you, this song
needs no introduction. New Order's Blue Monday is still the biggest selling
12-inch single in UK history, and this week it celebrates its 40th birthday. It
borrows from the disco of Donna Summer, the synth pop of Kraftwerk, and even
Spaghetti Western's soundtracks. Peter Hook played the bass and he told us how
the song came about. You know, when we were doing it, we didn't actually think
much of the track. It was meant to be an encore that the machines could play
while we went and got drunk in the dressing room. We were using very, very old,
almost barbaric equipment. If you made a mistake in a nine-minute song, you had
to go right back to the beginning. You had to go right back to the start and
start again. Still had no intention of putting a vocal on. And then when Bernard
heard it, and with a bit of pressure, shall we say, from our manager, Rob
Gretton, he was going, put a vocal on it, put a vocal on it. It's great, you
know. So we weren't too excited about it. How does it feel to treat me like you
do When you lay your hands upon me I suppose if you're going to say that the
marriage of the music and the sleeve made it a real nod towards the future, the
floppy disk itself, the emulator disk that was intrinsic in making Blue Monday
for all the samples, that they were all done on the emulator keyboard. So we
didn't realize when we were doing it that the process of emulating the disk with
the holes was the expensive bit. We were ending up celebrating the biggest
selling 12-inch, 500,000 I think it was. And we were actually celebrating losing
50 grand. The secret of music that we can never decipher is even we don't know
why. And to hear the original mix that me and Mike Johnson did in 1981 in
Britannia Row sound as good today as it did 40 years ago is an amazing
compliment. We really had no idea that this was going to still be today our
biggest earning song. That's such a good song, isn't it? That was Peter Hook
from New Order talking about Blue Monday. And let's end the newsroom with some
more of that. So this is the BBC World Service and here's Harriet Gilbert to
tell you about the next World Book Club. This month we're in France to talk
about a most extraordinary, daring and original novel called Pigtails. When it
was published in 1996 it created an enormous stir. It's not a feminist pamphlet.
It's a feminist book. It is. But I'm not telling you what to think, I hope. It's
the story of a lovely young woman who submits to the sexual demands of the
director of a perfume company. Her body gradually begins to change, growing more
and more like the body of a pig. At some points she is very animal. At some
other points she is very human. She oscillates according to the level of
aggression against her. She's not stable. Nobody's. It's a story of that, you
know. World Book Club with Marie Dariasek. Today at 10 GMT. I'm Misha Glenny,
presenter of the Invention of Russia on the Compass. Today we've reached the
Second World War. Going through the letters from soldiers at the front, there
was a complete carelessness for their own lives, you know. Hello, Mama, hello,
Papa, I am well, ready to lose my life in the service of the country and all the
rest of it. And I think these were absolutely genuine. Join me, Misha Glenny,
for the Invention of Russia, the Sacred Song of War, coming up after the BBC
World Service News. BBC News with Gareth Barlow. Protests in the Georgian
capital, Tbilisi, have continued late into the night. Demonstrators descended on
the Parliament building after legislators gave their initial approval to a bill
which requires organisations receiving funding from abroad to register as
foreign agents. The UN Refugee Agency has called on lawmakers in Britain to
reconsider draft laws that would detain and deport people arriving by boat to
claim asylum. It said the measures violated the Refugees Convention. The White
House says it supports a bill in Congress that will give President Biden powers
to ban the Chinese-owned app TikTok as a security threat. The legislation has
bipartisan support in the Senate. Five women have sued the American state of
Texas, saying they were denied abortions even though their lives were in danger.
Texas has an abortion ban but allows terminations in an emergency. President
Zelensky's adviser, Mikhailo Polyak, has said Ukraine was absolutely not
involved in the sabotage attacks last year that severed the Nord Stream gas
pipelines in the Baltic. Earlier, a report by the New York Times newspaper
suggested a pro-Ukrainian group was responsible for the attacks. A BBC
investigation has revealed how criminal gangs across Southeast Asia are
trafficking migrants and forcing them to carry out online romance scams. A
former insider described brutal conditions facing those imprisoned in compounds.
Cyclone Freddie is expected to make landfall again in Mozambique later this week
after it struck Madagascar on Monday for a second time. Madagascar's government
said eight people were killed and more than a thousand homes destroyed. And
scientists in Britain have found that bumblebees learn to solve puzzles by
watching their more experienced peers. Experts from Queen Mary University of
London trained a set of bees to open a puzzle box. The bees then passed on the
knowledge to others in their colonies. BBC News. On the 24th of June 1812,
Napoleon Bonaparte led an army, the multinational Grande Armée, into Russian
land. Almost 129 years later, Adolf Hitler ordered another multinational army
across the same border. The start of Operation Barbarossa, June 22, 1941. Both
these midsummer invasions destroyed their protagonists and destroyed millions of
lives as well. These were terrible years to be in the way. The Invention of
Russia. Presented by Misha Glenny. Episode 4. The Sacred Song of War. The
producer is Miles Ward. Yep. Great. Right. Ready to go. And this is Anthony
Beaver, author of Stalingrad and one of the best-selling historians in the
world. The Nazis wanted to advance to what they called the AA line, which was
the Archangel Astrakhan line, destroy the Red Army. Any further conflict could
be achieved really by the Luftwaffe just bombing them from time to time. And
they also had planned what was called the Hunger Plan, something which would
have starved to death 30 million Soviets. The rest would be turned into helots,
cultivating and providing the food from the fertile areas for Germany. The
Russians' capacity for resilience and suffering as demonstrated both in
Stalingrad, but also in events like the Siege of Leningrad. This must have a
profound impact on the country's psyche. Indeed. No British, French, American
army would have survived at Stalingrad. I mean, there was an extraordinary
mixture of, shall we say, compulsion and idealism. There were blocking squads,
there were executions. I mean, there was 13,000 executions. But at the same
time, going through the letters from soldiers at the front, there was a complete
carelessness for their own lives. You know, hello, Mama, hello, Papa, I am well,
ready to lose my life in the service of the country and all the rest of it. And
I think these were absolutely genuine. You did have this extraordinary feeling.
But as I say, unimaginable, at the end of the battle, there were still 10,000
civilians who had somehow survived in the ruins of Stalingrad, including about
1000 children, living off roots picked from the ground or any sort of crumbs
they could pick up anywhere. It is why the victory in May 1945 is regarded as
sacred. But this notion of Russian superiority, of Russian suffering, which is
such a contrast to the decadent West, it is, as you rightly say, the suffering
which sort of surpasses all understanding. But of course, this wasn't the first
time they'd been invaded from the West. Dominic Levin is the author of Napoleon
Against Russia. Well, Napoleon invaded Russia because Russia was the last sort
of independent continental great power. His plan was to destroy the Russian
army, as always, in the first month of the campaign, force the Russians into the
same kind of submission that he'd forced the Austrians, and to an even greater
extent, the Prussians, so that France would be the only great power in Europe.
And he reckoned he could do it. Most people thought he would succeed. Two
invasions, both times massive carnage inflicted by the West. Napoleon even
occupied Moscow before being forced to retreat. But there are other examples.
The Poles, they burnt Moscow to the ground. The Mongols did the same. Throw in
the Swedes, the Teutonic Knights, the French and British down in Crimea. There
are a lot of enemies in Russian history, and you'll find them all listed and
recalled in detail in Russia today, in special multimedia parks which
schoolchildren must attend. There are two central themes at these parks. We
thrive when united, and our enemies are everywhere. Oh, and one more thing. Our
leaders are smart. In 1812, the Russian leader was Alexander I. Just as Napoleon
had been tricked at the beginning of the campaign into thinking that the
Russians would fight in the borderland, and the force marched forward and lost
thousands of horses as a result. So again, once he gets to Moscow, he doesn't
know what to do. He sort of sits in Moscow for six weeks, expecting Alexander to
make peace. And basically, Alexander just laughs at him. Just a month and a half
after defeating the Russians at Borodino, Napoleon was forced to flee. And every
week that Napoleon sits in Moscow, the winter gets closer. The French find it
harder to feed themselves, and above all, feed their horses. Horses are the key
to Napoleonic era warfare in many ways, particularly on a campaign like the
Russian one. You know, your horses, without your cavalry, there's no
reconnaissance, there's no attack. And the Russians are the ones who are the
ones who are the ones who are the ones who have the most power. And without
cavalry, there's no reconnaissance, there's no shock, there's no pursuit. Can't
draw your guns. So the horses, the tank, the lorry, the aeroplane, mobile
artillery, the whole bloody lot. You know, long campaigns in Russia are
devastating for horses, unless they're properly looked after. Above all,
devastating for horses which haven't been bred on the steppe, and are therefore
much less tough than the Russian Cossack and light cavalry horses. So Napoleon
comes out of all this as a pretty shrewd character. He was a shrewd character.
He was an extremely effective diplomat. He was also, you know, grand strategist.
There's another element we should mention, though, the role of the Russians
themselves, the great patriots who rose up and hassled the invader, and who
played perhaps the key role in Napoleon's defeat. That was a huge deal in the
19th century, and well into the 20th century. So nowadays, we often talk about
the myth or the cult of the Great Patriotic War, referring to the years 1941 to
1945. But what people often forget is that a lot of that is based on the earlier
cult of the first patriotic war, the Patriotic War. This is Misha Gabarevich,
Russian-born historian, expert on the military in the national tale. Very, very
quickly, that gets subsumed in a cult of the emperor, you know, the czar,
essentially, with divine inspiration, a hero who almost single-handedly, I'm
exaggerating a little bit, had repelled Napoleon. And what's fascinating is that
this is a story that's, in a sense, repeated then in the 20th century with the
Great Patriotic War. Of 1941 to 45. Stalin was the one who became, you know, the
almost lone nemesis of Hitler, who had commanded, of course, you know, the
people of the Soviet Union, but it was really Stalin's leadership that proved
decisive. Why does that happen? So we're talking about an absolutist and
centralized state, where, of course, any sort of grassroots legitimacy that's
not derived from the supreme leader always presents a threat. What I think he's
saying is that this isn't just about history, this is about the interpretation,
even the weaponizing of the great national tale. We've seen off all these
invaders, and it's our great leaders you have to thank. But is that right? For
example, in 1941, at the start of the Nazi invasion, it's well known Stalin had
been fooled. Stalin's psychology during this particular period, despite all the
warnings, he was still convinced that somehow it was not in Hitler's interest.
And I think that this was actually the reason for the disaster of 1941 for the
Red Army and for the Soviet Union, that Stalin refused to really prepare or take
the threat of invasion seriously. So initially, the Wehrmacht sweep through
Soviet defenses, and it looks as though Hitler may succeed where Napoleon
failed. Why does Stalingrad become this extraordinarily decisive battle, not
just in Operation Barbarossa, but in the entire Second World War? The point
about Stalingrad, which was at the end of a series of disasters, both the
British and the Americans in Europe, in North Africa, and above all in the Far
East. But then we suddenly get the turnaround. Of course, the British will make
the emphasis on Alamein and all the rest of it. But I mean, that was a tiny
sideshow in comparison to what was happening in this vast clash of giants in the
Soviet Union. And Hitler thought that if he could secure the oil of the
Caucasus, then once again, his plan of Germany being self-sufficient and able to
fight on would still work. And this led to the complete psychological turning
point in the whole of the Second World War. And from that point on, as the
Western allies had to acknowledge, the Soviet Union was now a very great power
indeed, and everything had started to change in that particular way. With some
two million casualties, Stalingrad was the bloodiest, most decisive battle of
the Second World War. Was victory down to Stalin? Or the bravery of the Russians
who, as the opening song suggested, arose for a fight to the death against the
dark fascist forces in a people's war? In a people's war. A sacred war. History
in Russia wavers between the two, the people and the leader. When it serves the
Russian leaders, it's Uncle Joe who won the war. There's another city that
played an equally heroic role, Sebastopol in Crimea. It held out for 250 days
against the Italians and the Germans. A century earlier, it had held out against
another pair of invaders, the British and the French in the Crimean War. And
these two events are linked in the Russian memory. I also think that Crimea is
very relevant today. But a bit of history first. Tell us about this place,
Crimea, Roderick, if you would. First of all, where is it? Well, the Crimea,
it's almost an island in the Black Sea, attached by a narrow peninsula to what
is now Ukraine. Roderick Braithwaite, former ambassador in Moscow and author of
Russia, Myths and Realities. Ancient times, there were a number of Greek
colonies there. And then various people moved in, above all the Tatars, who were
a branch of the Mongols, moved in and set up a state of their own there in about
the 15th century. They regularly conducted raids into Muscovy, Russia, captured
people and took them away as slaves. They burned villages, they looted
everything in sight, right through into the 18th century. By then, Catherine the
Great and her great advisor, Potemkin, decided that enough was enough and they
captured Crimea. They built a great naval base there in Sevastopol, which is the
most wonderful natural harbour. And in the 1850s, we in the French invaded
Crimea and laid siege to Sevastopol. And one of Tolstoy's best works is based on
his experience as an artillery officer during that siege. Why did we and the
French get involved in the first place? Well, it was, of course, a distant war
as far as we were concerned, but we were an empire then. Our empire stretched
right across to India, Afghanistan. And we were always terrified that Russians
would in some way cut our lines of communication through the Mediterranean,
through the Middle East to our empire. So when the Russians and the Turks
started fighting in the Black Sea, we piled in with our naval power, which
enabled us to see off the Russians, and then with this botched attempt to invade
Crimea. The point is, in 1941, the Germans besieged Sevastopol. That siege too
lasted something like 250 days. And that siege too led to a Russian defeat. But
it was a glorious defeat. Russians think of the defense of Sevastopol against
the British and French and against the Germans as a glorious defeat. And it came
to my mind the other day, it plays the same sort of emotional part in their view
of their own history as Dunkirk does for us. So how did Crimea end up in
Ukraine? Well, that was an administrative quirk by Nikita Khrushchev, who at
that time was the boss of the Soviet Union. In the Soviet Union, there were
Union republics, which theoretically had the right to secede from the Soviet
Union. But of course, that was rubbish. They were firmly under control of
Moscow. So Khrushchev could hand out bits of territory without it having any
particular effect on people's everyday lives. And on the 300th anniversary of,
in the Russian version of the history, Ukraine joining Russia, he handed Crimea,
which was then part of Russia, to the Ukrainians, a sort of 300th birthday
present. It had no noticeable impact on everyday life. But of course, when
Ukraine became independent in 1991, it took Crimea with it. And that was bound
to be the emotions, but also the fact of the naval base in Sevastopol was bound
to be a huge source of contention between the Ukrainians and the Russians.
You're not kidding. Misha Gabovich again. So Russians have always assumed that
their empire is very, very different from colonial empires, much more benign, of
course, and that it came into being not as a result of conquest, but as a result
of a constant defensive movement. And this is a vision of history that is
propagated very intensely today in a series of multimedia parks called Russia,
My History, where essentially all of Russian history is portrayed as a never-
ending struggle against external enemies in the course of which Russians are
forced to move their borders ever further out simply to secure Russia. Which
means all their wars are defensive and sacred. Understand this mindset and the
takeover of Crimea, the special military operation in Ukraine, the constant
references to the Nazis, it all starts to make some twisted sense. Putin even
considers himself a bit of a history buff, except his interpretations are often
wrong. Many of Russia's wars were aggressive and not defensive, and what's more,
they could trigger unintended consequences. A good example, the Russo-Japanese
War of 1904 to 1905. Little mentioned in Putin's speeches because the Russians
lost. The Russians expected to win that war. It was a classic example of a war
that the Russians expected to be short and gloriously victorious over what they
regarded as a racially inferior enemy. There was a strong sense that the
Japanese were sort of subversion of the Mongols, as it were, from the past. And
this, of course, turned out to be quite wrong. Professor Simon Dixon of
University College London. And this is Robert Service, author of books on Lenin
and the Last Tsar. There was a lobby of opinion that Great Russia had to keep on
expanding and that the Japanese were ripe for picking. Nicholas II, who'd been
to Japan, he knew the Far East, but he knew it as a tourist. He had no
conception of what it was if a country industrialised. When the Japanese
surprised the Russian fleet, the Tsar was staggered. And not just because the
declaration of war hadn't yet arrived, but it got worse, much worse, when he
sent the Russian Baltic fleet halfway around the world to assist. Some of the
Imperial Navy got into trouble in the North Sea, so that the intelligence arm of
the Navy was less than totally adequate and mistook a British trawler for the
advancing Japanese fleet. This happened somewhere near Dogger Bank, didn't it?
It did. It happened off Dogger Bank. It was a shambles. When the Baltic fleet
finally did get round to the Pacific, the Japanese destroyed that one too. They
were very heavily overstretched on the supply line. And when things went badly
wrong, of course, that meant that disillusioned and injured troops were coming
back down the same supply line, making particular sort of flashpoints, notably
at the stations in the Urals along the way. That point about injured troops
returning along a rather narrow supply line and everything bunching up is a
really good one. That I think is worth emphasizing, because it's quite serious,
that. And you don't normally see very much about that in the books, because
you're right. I mean, it's mostly about Tsushima and the embarrassment, you
know, the fleet that sails all the way around the world. All the way around the
world. Firing at the trawlers at Dogger Bank. I mean, it's a bizarre story.
Yeah. They were humiliated in the war of 1904. So the rationale for maintaining
the powers of the Romanos was shattered. The myth of the Romanos was shattered
by this inglorious military engagement in the Far East. The story of Russia
between 1905 and the end of the war in 1945 is so bizarre and bloody, endlessly
bloody, that it's almost impossible to boil down into any sort of coherent
account. But I think you should give it a go. OK, then. Well, let's start with
the chaos, particularly in the military, as Russian troops lose all faith in the
Tsar. And his mystic advisor, Rasputin. During the First World War, that is.
Faster. OK, 1917, revolution in St. Petersburg, then Lenin's return, the end of
the Tsar. Followed by three years of war between the whites and the reds. The
whites? The remnants of the Imperial Army, a few Cossacks, and, of course,
outside forces. So basically, Imperial. Yes. So these were the Imperial forces.
Next up, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics under Comrade Stalin. A
Georgian. Which is followed by ruthless repression, deportation, and execution
on an unbelievable scale. And hunger, particularly in Ukraine. Which had tried
briefly to break free, as had other places like Georgia. And five-year plans,
collectivisation, more hunger, and death. And in 1939, the Molotov-Ribbentrop
Pact. When Hitler and Stalin agreed to slice Poland in two. Followed by Nazi
invasion, the heroism of Stalingrad, and victory in the Sacred War. The thing
that happens when you read so much history. I mean, Napoleon Bonaparte, or you
read about the First or the Second World War. You read about the famine in
Ukraine. Forget contemporary events. I just think to be caught in the middle of
all that. I think this again and again. To be caught in the middle of all those
troop movements must have been horrific. Wow. You know, you were living ordinary
lives, and suddenly these monstrous formations appear on... Hundreds of
thousands. Appear on your doorstep. Locusts with guns. What a great description,
Miles. These are the bare bones of the period. But what was it like to be taught
about all this? How, for example, was it taught in Ukraine? So my name is
Kateryna Khinkulova. You can make it Kateryna Khinkulova. And I come from Kiev,
Ukraine. If you recognise Kateryna, it's because she introduces all these
episodes. So I started university in 1992. And the university I went to was the
University of Kiev Mohyla Academy. It's building was housing a Soviet Navy
school. But in the early 1990s, it was trying to reconnect Ukraine with European
educational traditions. That was this very new concept to study history of
civilisation, because the way the history was taught in the Soviet Union, it was
about the class struggle. So whatever it was, it was always about class
struggle. But then it was also about dates. It was all very specifically in this
year, this revolution happened and that revolution happened. But you didn't
really study history as these ideas and these big events that changed the way
humankind was moving. And presumably, this is the first cohort that is learning
about Ukrainian history in a way that it would never have been taught in the
Soviet Union. Well, yes and no. Why it wasn't confusing is because people mostly
in the Soviet Union were very, very cynical about literally everything and that
kind of reality that was presented to them. They were very cynical and they
didn't really believe it. So all the communist slogans and what you read in the
newspapers and what you saw on TV. So in that respect, the final years of the
Soviet Union were very, very different from what we're seeing, for example, in
Russia now. So at home, would you talk about things like, for example, the
Ukrainian famine, the great famine of the 1930s and what was really going on in
Ukraine in the Second World War? I mean, did you have differentiated
conversations? At some point, we started having those conversations. And it was
interesting because it was very far cry from the official history, but also its
history of Ukraine. As the perestroika kicked off and things started opening up,
people started learning about the Stalinist purges and the famine, about the
Second World War. And as that information became public knowledge, I learned
about my own family's history. So that was the point that my father told me just
how many people in his family were taken away and shot. And my grandmother
was... I knew that she was a very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very,
very, very, very, knew that she was in the war. She was very, very young. And
there was always when I was very little, there was this sort of myth how she
signed up because she was very excited about joining up. And I think that was to
some degree, that was true, although I think there was some pressure put on her
to join the war effort. And then she later told me all sorts of terrible things
that happened to her in terms of kind of harassment and probably worse. And
just, you know, it was pretty awful. But also, she suddenly just started talking
about the famine and that she was very little at the time and she saw these
people who would walk on foot from countryside, these bodies in the street and
never enough food. And her father was, my great grandfather, was a baker. And
she said that he took some raw dough from work and brought it home and they ate
it at night. And that's how they survived, because there was literally just sort
of nothing to eat. And I said, and why was the dough raw? Why did you, why
didn't he bake it? And she said, well, because that would make a smell. Baked
bread would alert the neighbors or alert the police. So that didn't come out
until the early 1990s. And as you were learning about all these things, both at
home and then later at university, how dramatic and intense was the experience
of trying to work out that relationship between Ukraine and Russia? You know
this, the, what's it, you say a German word for it, that sort of science of
memory, memory studies or something like this? Vergangenheit, Bevölkigung, the
overcoming of the past. So I think if you'd asked me that question in the 1990s,
I would have answered it one way and then 2014 in a different way. And then now
it's another way. Yes. So we have these layers. Yeah, realization that suddenly
there was this whole other world of this, you know, Ukrainianness that I hadn't
been told about just, you know, for my parents to prevent me from kind of
blurting it out in kindergarten or at school and then endangering everyone else.
There are few countries whose invention, the telling of its history, has been so
weaponized or fudged than is the case with Russia. It's the blurring of the
Soviet and Russian experiences which makes it so complicated. And that is what
the Kremlin, as well as ordinary Russians, are having to come to terms with
right now. You're listening to the BBC World Service, where So Jong-li is
exploring the alarming growth in cyber sex crime in South Korea. Human Rights
Watch recently named my country the digital sex crime capital of the world.
Illicit sexual footage. Dark web chat rooms. Hacking personal information. I
want to find out how we got there. Somebody is watching me. Tuesday at 9.30 and
20 GMT.