TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds on Saturday night at 8. BBC News at 9 o'clock.
President Biden has used a speech in Poland to insist the United States and its
allies won't waver in their support for Ukraine. Speaking ahead of the first
anniversary of Russia's invasion, he said Vladimir Putin's lust for power and
land would fail. In his own speech this morning, Mr Putin blamed the West for
provoking the war. The main nursing union has suspended a planned 48-hour strike
in England next week after agreeing to resume pay negotiations with the
government. The Health Secretary Steve Barclay is due to meet bosses of the
Royal College of Nursing for discussions tomorrow. Our health editor Hugh Pym
has the latest. We learned in a joint statement from the government and the
Royal College of Nursing that they were about to start intensive talks over what
would aim to be a fair and reasonable pay settlement. Now that sounds quite
anodyne, but I think you can assume that the Royal College of Nursing wouldn't
have agreed to these talks if they hadn't felt assured the government was
prepared to talk about pay in this financial year, potentially adding to the 4%
already awarded. That's been the sticking point up until now. The National
Education Union has rejected pleas from ministers to call off its own strike
next week. Teachers across the north of England are due to walk out next
Tuesday. The government has indicated that a 3% wage rise for experienced
teachers next year would be reasonable, but the NEU says that would amount to a
pay cut because of soaring inflation. Asda and Morrisons are limiting purchases
of some fruit and vegetables, including tomatoes and cucumbers, because of a
shortage of fresh produce. It's been blamed largely on extreme weather in Spain
and North Africa, where floods, snow and hail have affected harvests. A British
Army officer who made a record-breaking trek across Antarctica has collected her
MBE at Windsor Castle. Captain Preet Chandi, known as Polar Preet, completed the
longest ever solo polar ski expedition in January. Two years earlier, she made
what's thought to have been the first unsupported expedition across Antarctica
by a woman of colour. BBC News. In half an hour here on Radio 4, Jim Al-Khalili
will be talking to a world expert on dust, the cosmic kind. The astrophysicist
Hayley Gomez will be discussing her life scientific at half past nine. But
first, it's time for Inside Health, and tonight James Gallagher is getting his
sperm checked for a special edition about male reproductive health. OK, so this
is the oncology suite. So if you just follow me. Thank you. Hello there, and
welcome to Inside Health. Just take a seat on the chair for me there. So this is
room three. This is where you'll be producing your sample today. For this
edition, I'm doing a test that I'll be honest, is both intimate and
intimidating. So can I just please firstly get you to confirm your name? James
Gallagher. Perfect. And can I get you to confirm which test you're here for
today? Semen analysis. Perfect. Yeah, we're talking sperm counts and whether
they're falling. Basically just to say that you must produce your sample via
masturbation only. Try not to use any lubrications or any saliva if possible. If
you do need lubrication, give us a call and we can provide you with a sperm-
friendly lubrication. Just a couple of things to note on the form. You will need
to confirm whether you've had a fever in the last three months. I have not.
Perfect. You will need to state your abstinence, which should be between two and
five days. It is between two and five. Perfect. This is the specimen pot. Once
you're done producing your sample, just pop it into the clear specimen bag there
and then you can give us a call. Thank you very much. So I'll leave you to it
and don't forget to lock the door behind you. Thank you. That's a good tip. Hi.
How are you? All done. Good. Right, so if I could just take your sample. At the
time of production I'll just pop that on there. And did you manage to get the
entire sample into the container? Yes, I did. OK, I'll show you the way out when
you're ready. I'm ready. Perfect. Thank you very much. Take care. We'll find out
my results in a moment because today we're investigating what's happening to our
sperm and whether it's getting harder to have children. Professor Cheryl Homer
from the Fertility Clinic is going to do the analysis. But first, we're joined
by a couple that she's helped. Suzanne and Richard, welcome to Inside Health. So
take me back. When did you first start thinking about having children? Richard
said, I've been thinking about it. Given our age, why don't we both just go and
get tested? Because if there are any challenges that it'd be good to know
because then we can get them addressed. So we were trying to be proactive about
it, I think. And Richard, what were the results for you when they came back? So
I remember where it was, actually. I was walking to the car and it was Professor
Homer. She said, oh, I've got your results and there's some good news and some
not so great news. And I was like, OK. And it was all of a sudden I didn't turn
the ignition on in the car and I was like, well, what's the not good news? She
told me my count was low, my mortality wasn't that great. And she explained
everything in great detail. I was like, this is not what I was expecting. And my
mind started racing and I messaged Suzanne. And Suzanne, what was going through
your head at that moment? I kind of feel punched in the stomach. I just remember
that. I still got lurching, my heart dropping. They said it's so low that
there's almost zero chance of you conceiving. And that AB chance would be
through IBF, but that was very slim. This is not what I wanted to hear. You
know, having had that conversation with Suzanne, having realised I'd met the
love of my life and I wanted to have a family and we were that little bit older.
Did you really feel the burden of that? Yeah, I did. And I think as a man, we
all think we're a bit of a stud and, you know, we will spend our youth trying
not to get anyone pregnant and everything. And then actually it doesn't always
mean that you can get someone pregnant because you might have an underlying
problem that you are not aware of. And I thought as a man, well, what can I do?
We're going to hear from Suzanne and Richard again shortly. But for now,
Professor Cheryl Homer from Andrology Solutions and the University of Kent has
come into the studio. So we're investigating whether sperm counts are falling.
And Cheryl, you've got my results. Shall we go through them? Sure. I'm delighted
to do that. So from a sperm point of view, the three main things we're looking
at is the count. So that's just the total number. And funnily enough, you'd
think it was just the total number, but it's the parameter that seems to be more
related to your fertility for some reason is the count per milliliter of
ejaculate. OK, so like the concentration. The concentration, exactly. And your
concentration is borderline. It's not what we would call low, but it's
borderline, on the lower end of normal. We also report the total count as well,
which is the total number of sperm in the entire ejaculate. And that was also
borderline. So what that immediately tells me is that your testes might be not
functioning 100 percent because that's where your sperm are made. They're going
OK, but they could be doing better. Now, this isn't crushing me because I've had
my children. But I can imagine that you would have conversations where this is
really relevant to people's lives. So when you have a borderline count, the
thing about sperm parameters is that they aren't a sort of cliff edge where you
have a reference value. And if you're at that level or above, everything's fine.
And if you're below it, it's a disaster and you're infertile. It doesn't work
like that because a lot of people have sperm counts that are below the reference
range and are perfectly normally fertile. And then there are a lot of people who
have counts in the normal range and they can't get their partners pregnant. So I
think we have to get it into proportion. Don't panic. But I think it is very
important that if we start to see something that's a little bit borderline or
not quite right, we need to start asking questions. Why is it that the testes
aren't functioning 100 percent? Now, are you looking at things in my life that I
might be doing that could be the reason for that? Or can I go like I'm in the
twilight of my 30s now? I'm not 18 anymore. Does that have an impact? So I think
age does have an impact. There are some papers that have reported that semen
quality can decline with age. I don't think 30 years old would be considered the
point at which we would expect to see things deteriorating. Twilight of 30s. No,
absolutely not. And I mean, theoretically, men should be fertile their entire
lives. I see plenty of cases where that definitely happens late into old age
rock stardom. But I think if I were to be presented with a person who was having
difficulties conceiving, I wouldn't want to put this on the back burner. I'd
want to know why with this one in particular, with the count. You need to be
very scientific about this and say, what is causing this? And there could be a
lot of things that are causing this. Yes, of course, your lifestyle is important
and it is a factor. But it's rarely the sole problem. So when you're looking at
me and those results, what are you thinking? Well, first of all, one of the
things that's really important about a semen analysis is that it is a marker of
your general health. If you are unwell, one of the first things that happens is
your fertility starts to decline. Certainly infections can have an impact,
particularly if they raise temperature in the body. So high temperature would
also be a potential cause of a low sperm count, which is why, you know, you read
a lot in the media about wearing cotton boxer shorts because you don't want to
wear tight underwear to heat your testes up. You don't want laptops on your lap,
cycling, which I know that you do. Not everybody is affected by these things.
But if you are heating up your testes, depending on your physiology, it can
possibly affect your sperm. Because, of course, why are your testes outside your
body? Because they need to be a little bit cooler. That's right. So even just
heating them up a couple of degrees causes potentially a huge problem for sperm
development. Do you know what the leading known cause of male infertility is? I
don't. So strangely enough, a lot of people think it's lifestyle, but it isn't.
What is it? The leading known cause is varicocele. I don't know what that is. So
that is literally, it's like a clump of varicose veins in the testes. And what
it does is it impairs blood flow in the testes. So you get an engorgement of
blood from the body, which is at 37 degrees, and it heats the testes up, which
should be at 33 to 34 degrees. So it heats the testes up to 37, and it causes a
lot of heat damage. So we're aware that heat damage impairs sperm, but when you
have a varicocele... And here's the body doing it to itself. That's it. Oh, I
thought he liked to come out. Well, as you can hear, Richard and Suzanne's story
had a happy ending. You're a little chatty chappy, aren't you? So how did they
get there? I read everything, and I found out through Sharon as well that it not
has to do with the temperature of your testicles. And at the time, my lifestyle
was very healthy, so I had not huge worries there, but I was consuming a lot of
coffee. I was biking a lot. Then I thought, OK, well, what are we going to do?
And I saw putting peas on your testicles was a great thing. So I went and bought
some bird's eye peas. I was going to say, I've put frozen peas on many parts of
my body, but... Exactly. That's a new one. I mean, these peas stayed with us
right to when we had Freddie, actually. I hope they just got binned at the end.
They were loyal. Yeah, they did get binned. They weren't cooked and they haven't
gone into any of his food. The peas were there and it was summer, so it was
really hot. And I suddenly realised that actually tight boxer shorts are really
bad for you. So I changed all my boxer shorts. When did you find out you had a
varicocele? I actually did know I had a varicocele. I remember a doctor years
ago saying, you know, you should keep an eye on that because you might need to
have it operated on in future. But it never changed in shape or size, so I just
kind of ignored it, really. What was the varicocele like? Was it something you
could notice, something you could see or feel? Yeah, you could see it and you
could feel it. Naturally, if I'm honest, it's like a bag of worms with one
particular large worm underneath the skin. Suzanne, had you ever heard of a
varicocele before? No. It transpired that it was a grade three varicocele, which
is quite high grade. And that was contributing to the heating of the testicles.
So for the majority of the day, when I didn't have a pair of like ICPs on my
testicles, they were actually getting heated. And the fact that it's such a
major contribution to male infertility. Was it easy to have it removed? Yeah, it
was over in a blink of an eye and cut off the blood supply to this particular
vein. They insert a spring, which he looks at, he describes it as the spring
that you find in a pen. And then tell you to lead a normal life. I remember
Richard Cominghine super excited because he felt we'll be back in the game. With
a bunch of flowers in one hand and a bag of frozen peas in the other, right?
Exactly, James. How long did it take after you had the operation and you're
doing all those other things? I was having cold showers. I was jumping in cold
plunge pools. There wasn't a thing I didn't try. Suzanne, correct me if I'm
wrong. It was just over six months, wasn't it? Just over six months that we
could see naturally. Yay! Yes. Which was pretty special. I wish you many nights
full of sleep and rest. Thank you, James. Knowing that you won't get them. Well,
I'll take the one we've got then. Thank you very much for inviting us. If you do
have a varicoseal and you have fertility problems, it's present in about 40% of
infertile men. You need to get it checked and you need to discuss with your
doctor whether you can get it repaired. What I find fascinating about that,
Cheryl, is that is something I have never heard anyone discuss. Exactly. Cheryl,
when I did the sample, I had to have abstained from any form of ejaculation for
a very set period of time. It had to be at least two days in the clear, but no
more than five. Why that window? If you have a short period of abstinence, your
testes don't have enough time to output more sperm. So when you actually come to
produce your sample for analysis, it's too low count. So we need to wait two
days for it to recuperate. What about at the other end? The other end is also
very important because sperm don't live forever. You're making sperm every time
I'm talking to you now. Every second you're making a thousand sperm. A thousand?
A thousand sperm a second. Can't help looking at my watch as the second hand
ticks round. Would that be just then a load of dead sperm? Exactly. So we need
to get it just right. And again, it's important for why people are infertile. A
lot of people are not having regular intercourse. They're saving it up for
ovulation because they think the more they save it up, the better it is for
ovulation. But of course, you're removing about 50% of what you have inside you
every time you ejaculate. So you are basically clearing them out. So the more
often you ejaculate, the more you get rid of the dead sperm, and the more fresh
and alive they will be when you want them to fertilise your partner's eggs.
There are a couple of other things that you look into, aren't there? Because
it's not just the sheer number of sperm in there. It's kind of like what the
individual sperm themselves are looking like. So it's about what they're looking
like and also the way they're moving. Now, your motility, the percentage of
sperm that are moving, looks very good. It's well within the normal range. And
they're moving what we say is progressively. They're progressing, they're moving
forward, so they're getting somewhere. The problem is that they're not moving
fast. If you look at the comet... Oh, they go forwards but slowly. They're
sluggish. So that's one issue that I'm thinking, they're not happy chappies, are
they? And the other thing too that's quite telling is the shape of the sperm,
the morphology, is not great. Yeah, I saw that headline on the report. The
phrase 98% abnormal is one to terrify anybody. I think a lot of people are
absolutely terrified by this and they absolutely focus on this as the main
thing. One thing to understand is that morphology is probably the least
correlated with your fertility out of all the parameters that we look at. The
other thing is that the reference value is only 4% normal forms. I find that
remarkable. Take any man off the street, the most fertile person you'd come
across and you'd be like, as long as 4% of your sperm are okay, we think that's
normal. But think about it. You're producing millions and millions of sperm. Why
do you produce millions of sperm? One of the reasons could be that the majority
of them are pretty ugly. They're not able to get in. So when we do the shape
analysis, and again, it doesn't mean they're abnormal inside. It doesn't mean
they're genetically abnormal. We're talking about just the shape. So it's like
looking at a car and if it's a bit bashed in, it still might be able to drive.
Although I do have to say that there are certain types of morphological defects
that we know are associated with genetic abnormalities. And actually, your type
of morphological defect can be associated with stress to the testes, including
heat damage. I'm suddenly thinking about our New Year's episode of Inside Health
when I was submerged in 40 degree water. Doesn't help. Well, it may have helped
other parts of my body. We want to go back through the episodes on BBC Sounds.
How much can you trust a snapshot at one moment in time? Like how variable is
someone's sperm quality? Like if we did this in six months, would you expect it
to be identical? We wouldn't. If you've got a borderline value like this, I
would probably say to you, let's just make sure you're not doing anything silly
in your lifestyle and let's just recheck it again. And it does take three months
for the sperm to recover to anything that you're doing to it. Cheryl, I'm
curious because how many years have you been looking at sperm? Oh my gosh, I'm
ancient, so at least 30 years. And you're very much at the sharp end of it, so
you're not looking at what's happening to the general public. There's this big
debate and argument about whether sperm counts are going down. What does your
experience tell you? I think that there still seems to be a trend for decreasing
sperm counts. I think from the literature that I've read, that appears to be the
case. Professor Homer, thank you. Whether sperm counts are actually falling
feels like a really important question and one that we should have the answer
to, and yet it's the source of massive debate. So let's thrash it out because
I'm joined by two people who really don't agree, Professor Alan Pacey from the
University of Sheffield and Professor Richard Sharp from the University of
Edinburgh. So Alan and Richard, welcome to Inside Health. Thank you. Thank you.
So I'm going to ask you first of all, let's try and get this as simple as
possible. Alan first, are sperm counts falling? I think the case currently is
unproven. Richard? On balance, I would say that they are, but I recognise that
we can't prove it conclusively one way or another. And Richard, when we say
sperm counts are falling, do we mean they're falling for every single person or
is it just a small group that are having really big drops in their sperm count
and therefore that's bringing down the overall average? The best evidence we've
got is that it's a change affecting the whole population, not just a subset.
Okay, so let's try and tease apart why you've both looked at the same evidence
and come to slightly, subtly different conclusions. Richard, do you think there
is a case? So just describe it for me. A number of studies over the past 15
years or so have all shown that when you analyse sperm counts from men
unselected for their fertility status, sperm counts appear to be lower now than
they were in the past and that's based on many thousands of individual men. And
when you say unselected for their fertility status, that means this is just when
you're looking at Joe Publick? Absolutely, because if you were focusing on men
who had fertility problems, then you would expect that they would have a lower
sperm count than the male population. Alan, you look at those same bits of
scientific research and don't come to the same conclusion. Well, I see the lines
on the graph going down, but what I find really difficult is the fact that over
time we've changed our technique and there's been a lot of emphasis over the
last 20 or 30 years to improve our sperm counting or our sperm quality
measurement technique. And of course, if we haven't kept our technique the same
over time, then you have to ponder whether it's technique rather than biology.
I'm not going to lie, the moment I opened my report and found out that 98% of my
sperm were abnormal, I was having a bit of a moment. I think that's perfectly
natural and I've seen many, many hundreds of men that have had the same
reaction. I think that particular measure of sperm health and assessment of size
and shape is so terribly difficult to do. Okay, but if I were to just look at
the study that came out towards the end of last year, it was published in Human
Reproduction Update, and it was a big study looking across 53 different
countries, across multiple continents, and seemed to come up with this
consistent pattern. And the numbers in it feel terrifying. Like concentration of
sperm falling from 101 million per mil down to 49, so more than halving, total
sperm counts falling by 62%. I mean, probably terrifying, lots of couples trying
to conceive. Yeah, it's scary, but we haven't seen in that graph that people
have moved hugely from the normal to the abnormal, where we might have clinical
concern. And that's why, for me, this is still within the realms of measurement
error. I would disagree, because although I recognize what Alan is saying, and
there is truth in it, the way that people first came to wanting to measure sperm
counts to determine if there had been a fall with time was to do with other
aspects of male reproductive health changing for the worse over a similar time
period. And the leading such change was in testicular germ cell cancer, which
has increased progressively across the board in many countries. And it is a
disease of young men, remarkably. So when people then put their focus on sperm
count, it was in that context. And Richard, we've heard a lot about varicocele
today. It was something that was really new to me. But do we know if that's
going up in incidence over time as well? It's a condition that's actually quite
poorly diagnosed and not reliably diagnosed in every centre. So you would need
very, very good data to actually evaluate whether there had been any change.
Well, let me ask a completely different, well, subtly different question then.
Are we more concerned about male fertility today than we were 20 or 30 years
ago? Richard? I'm concerned because leaving aside whether sperm counts have
fallen, the situation that we have today is that in men of reproductive age,
there is something like one in five, one in six men, depending on where you live
in northern Europe, who has a sperm count that is low enough to negatively
impact their fertility. It doesn't render them completely infertile necessarily,
but in a modern context of where couples are only starting to try for a family
when they are in their mid-30s, and I'm particularly focusing now on the female
partner being in their mid-30s, her fertility is in progressive decline and is
already reduced by 30% to 60% compared with in her 20s, early 20s. Combine that
with a partner who has a low sperm count, which will mean that it will take him
longer to impregnate his partner than if he had a higher sperm count. That's a
recipe for increasing infertility because time isn't on their side. Alan, do you
share that analysis? I do. We should absolutely be concerned because the example
that Richard gave about increasing incidence of testicular cancer, the data is
really clear and there's no way that you can argue your way out of that one, and
that concerns me greatly. So it suggests that something is happening to the
testis or the developing testis to mean that in older adult life there are more
likely to be fertility concerns. Whether that manifests itself in dramatic
changes in sperm count, I don't think is the important question because of all
of the reasons that I think that that data is difficult to understand. The
ageing stuff is really important, but I want to slightly put it to one side
because that's people's choice and often guided by society, it's not always a
choice. But I'm just slightly more interested in whether there are environmental
factors, are there things that we are either doing to our own bodies or are
being done to our bodies that are affecting our fertility? It depends on what
point those things are being done. Adult men, couples interested in their
fertility, always focus on the question about what they are doing now and what
they can change now in their lives. And actually the evidence suggests that
there's actually very little in terms of lifestyle influences on adult
fertility. Where it gets more interesting and where I'm going to hand over to
Richard because he's done more work in this area, are potential exposures of the
foetus before the male was born being a really sensitive part of that process.
So Richard, when I'm thinking about my fertility, do I really need to be
thinking about what my mum was doing, you know, 30 plus years ago? It does
appear to be that. And of course, there's nothing that you can do about that in
retrospect. So the best evidence that we have is that there is a critical period
during early foetal development. So when the foetus is tiny, just a few
centimetres long, that the foetal testes at that time start to produce
testosterone, the male sex hormone, and it's that that brings about the
masculinisation of the body. Otherwise it would develop as a female. And it's
that process that appears or may be going wrong. And we know that if it does go
wrong, then it results in a cascade of changes which can increase the risk of
having one or more male reproductive disorders later in life and potentially
sperm count reduced fertility in adulthood, although that is the one that's the
most difficult to study. Of course, if we're talking about consequences in terms
of sperm count in adulthood, we've got to wait 20 or more years before we see
what has happened. You can start the study, Richard, then your grandkids could
finish it off. Best of luck with trying to get funding for that. I read a lot as
well about endocrine disruptors, the fact that we live in a far more chemical
world, and it's those things that are getting inside our bodies and affecting
fertility. I think the jury is very much out on that. The majority of the people
who work on this are absolutely sold on this being the case. I am far from
convinced. In fact, I've become less and less convinced as time has gone by that
that is the primary mechanism that we should be looking at. And if you were to
take a pair of 25-year-olds today and a pair of 25-year-olds in the 1960s, does
it take longer for them to get pregnant now? The basis of your question is at
the heart of what we call a time to pregnancy study. And one would predict the
25-year-olds in modern times today would take longer, but that might be due to a
variety of reasons, including sexual frequency. And we know that sexual
frequency in people today is lower than it was 30 years ago, and there's data to
show that. So I'm not sure that that will necessarily give you a handle on the
sperm count question. I can't help but be struck, though, by it feels like the
consequences of not knowing the answer to this are huge. Like, if sperm counts
are falling as precipitously as some of these studies claim, and that was
projected out into the future, a journalist like me would be forgiven for
writing end-of-human-race-type headlines. It's going to take more than just good
science. It almost takes a good political will to get behind this. Do we need to
know the answer to whether sperm counts are falling? That's a really good
question. I would like to know the answer, because I think it would give one
more element of evidence to whether male reproductive health is under the level
of crisis that we think, but arguably we might be able to answer that question
through other means. So fertility rates, disorders of the male reproductive
system, such as testicular cancer. We could look at how the uptake of assisted
reproduction is around the world. So there are big, big, massive, hundreds of
thousands of pieces of data that doesn't rely on the sperm count, that are
proxies of male fertility, and we could be doing more with those. I agree. And
we can never go back in time and check sperm counts from the past using modern
techniques. So I think that to some extent, it's a question that we are always
going to be debating and never completely resolve. Richard Sharp, Alan Pacey,
thank you so much for coming on the programme. Thank you. Thank you. Thanks as
well to Professor Cheryl Homer and especially to Suzanne, Richard and Baby
Freddy. Everyone at the Inside Health team wishes you years of parental joy to
come. Now I think the debate about sperm counts is going to continue to rage,
but it's clear male fertility is something we all need to pay more attention to.
See you next time. Inside Health was presented by James Gallagher. The producer
was Erica Wright. Now on Radio 4, we're the look ahead to the world tonight at
10. We're joined by Ritala Shah. Hello, Amanda. Tonight, two presidents, two
speeches. President Putin says he's suspending participation in the last
remaining nuclear arms control treaty. So how serious is this and what's the
mood in Russia? We hear from a former senior leader of NATO. Meanwhile,
President Biden's reaffirmed his support for Ukraine, but is there a real US
strategy for ending the war? Also, the government here has published its public
sector pay recommendations for the coming financial year. Could this mark the
beginning of the end of strike action? And the SNP leadership contender, Kate
Forbes, has denied her campaign's been derailed by her comments on gay marriage.
But is there any way of gauging public reaction in Scotland? That's all coming
up on The World Tonight at 10. Thanks, Ritala. Now on Radio 4, it's time for The
Life Scientific. Here's Jim Al-Khalili. Hello and welcome to The Life
Scientific. Today I'm in the Peerhead building in Cardiff for the Cardiff
Science Festival and I'm talking to an astrophysicist who grew up just down the
road from here in Bari. Both her parents left school as soon as they could, but
she stayed on in education as long as possible, studying for a degree and PhD at
Cardiff University, where she's now a professor of astrophysics, specialising in
cosmic dust, those small particles of matter spread out through interstellar
space. For centuries, cosmic dust was nothing more than a source of irritation
for most astronomers, because like smog, it prevented them from seeing the
stars. A bit like the foggy view I saw here across Cardiff Bay when I arrived
this morning. Now, cosmic dust is challenging some deeply held assumptions about
the physics of stars. And being able to see through it has revealed a lot more
of the universe. Professor Hayley Gomez from Cardiff University, welcome to The
Life Scientific. Thank you, thanks for having me. Well, Hayley, I should perhaps
have introduced you as Hayley Gomez MBE, because in 2018 your work was
recognised by the Queen. That must have been a nice surprise. Yes, it was
surreal. I still remember the day I was changing nappies on parental leave. Very
glamorous. Yes, very glamorous. And the letter came and I had to read it out to
my husband and say, is this a parking ticket or is this something else? And it
was very strange. And then I suddenly thought, oh, I've still got to change the
nappy. I'd better carry on doing that. It was for services to physics, and in
particular all the work you've done to inspire the next generation of physicists
and astronomers. Which outreach project would you say you're most proud of? We
did a project called Universe in the Classroom, which I'm really proud of
because it took physics and astronomy and the excitement of space into primary
schools. So it kind of looked at talking to very young children, and even those
children already had ideas about who could be a scientist. So they often drew a
male scientist, a white scientist, lab coat and glasses. And we found that after
kind of working with them a little bit and telling them about space, they ended
up thinking of a wider range of scientists. They drew themselves as scientists
or they drew people that were like themselves, which was really lovely to see
that even though those old fashioned thoughts of science and who could do
science at such a young age could actually be turned around. So I feel really
proud that we managed to do that in Wales. Of course, you yourself are a shining
example of how you don't have to be a certain kind of scientist. So Hayley
Gomez, let's talk about what got you into astrophysics. You grew up in Bury in
South Wales, and I understand both your parents were unemployed for most of your
childhood. Is that right? Yeah, we had a very nice childhood, but it was very
noisy. There were five of us in a kind of council house. And yeah, there was
nobody around us that had any desire to go to university or even do A-levels. It
was kind of that wasn't the path that everybody took. Everybody just took the
leave school when you can get a job, settle down. But I've always found learning
is quite a calming, quiet process. And I think part of it was an escape from
that kind of loud, chaotic family. My producer tells me you spent a lot of time
at the local library. Yeah, that's right. I had a lot of freedom as a child. So
one thing my parents were really good at is that they would just let me walk
down the bottom of the street, go around the corner, local library. And I would
sit there all day, every day. And is that for the peace and quiet or for the
books? Peace and quiet and the books. But I love the fact that you could find
out anything. So books for me were a huge escapism. So it was wonderful. And I
remember reading such a wide range. I'd read Asterix comics, even though they
were in Welsh and I couldn't speak Welsh. I would still read them. And then I
read lots of stories. And I kind of, it sounds very cliche, but I stumbled upon
a book, which was an encyclopedia of space. And I remember opening it and there
was this really badly drawn sketch of a black hole. And I remember just being
caught up in that. How can there be a hole in space? How can there be a black
hole in the universe? How do they even know that exists? And I remember from
that point on, I just thought, I need to know what's going on here. And that's
what that's that's been your journey, hasn't it? Because you are now a professor
of astrophysics. So tell me, Hayley Gomez, were you a stellar student at school?
No. How should I be here? No. I liked I did well in physics and maths. I didn't
really enjoy them, but I did well in them. So I kind of chose to take them on. I
loved learning. So I knew I wanted to do A-levels. And for your A-levels, you
actually had to switch schools because you went to an all-girls school. But then
to do A-levels, you had to go to a boys school. That's right. It sounds very old
fashioned. I was in a girls, all girls comprehensive school and they didn't do
physics in the girls school at A-level. And I had to go to the boys school and,
you know, walking, walking down the atrium of the boys school, thousands of boys
kind of catcalling and wolf whistling and shouting at you, walking through the
atrium to get to the sixth form room. And there were about 12 girls in this
school compared to over a thousand boys. It's quite tough. So how did you cope?
I didn't cope that well, actually. I had some very good teachers. I had a maths
teacher who really encouraged my interest in space and a physics teacher who did
the same. But I actually, I kind of got a part-time job and most of my friends
were just dropping out of school. And I just kind of thought maybe learning
isn't my journey. Maybe I should just get a full-time job and leave. And I
didn't. I didn't do very well. You'd also left home by this point. That's right.
Yes. Yeah. So I'd left home by 17. Again, it's the noise. And I shared a room
with my sister and two 17-year-old girls sharing a room. It's just, so yeah, I'd
left home and I had to pay bills, you know, so I had part-time jobs. You didn't
get high A-level grades. No. But you still managed to get into Cardiff
University. That's right. So I, yeah, I did very badly. I mean, I'm not ashamed
to say I had a C and two Ds at A-level. And normally that wouldn't get you into
an astronomy degree at university. But I only applied to Cardiff because it was
the local department and also because I knew some of the research they were
doing. I was interested in it. And I got, I got accepted after an interview,
which was wonderful. They let me in even though I hadn't got the grades
expected, but they could see I had a passion. And so, yeah, I got in. I somehow
scraped in. And since then it's been, you know, I've never left. I love it. Was
it plain sailing as a, as an undergraduate? No, no, no, no. A year one was fine.
A year two, I found that I actually, I had a letter home from one of, one of my
now colleagues, a professor in the department who wrote me a letter home saying,
if you don't back up your ideas, then we're going to have to kick you out. You
know, you're not coming to lectures. You're not, you're not doing what you're
meant to do. But this was because you were working. I was working all night in a
petrol station in Barry. And so I just didn't go very often to uni and I'm still
getting OK grades, but I just, I just wasn't going. And when I got that letter,
I thought, OK, I either now leave or I stay. And if I stay, I have to make it
worth my while. And I kind of felt a little bit, you know, a professor telling
me that I'm not turning up to lectures in a letter was quite, quite kind of
scary. I thought, oh, so I did decide to actually focus on the studies. And
then, you know, I just loved it. Working fewer hours at the petrol station. Yes,
absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. A little bit more sleep. Always good. Well, Hayley
Gomez, after your degree, you stayed on at Cardiff to do a PhD. Was this the
point when you became interested in cosmic dust? Yes. I had a wonderful PhD
supervisor called Mike Edmonds. And Mike was kind of had these crazy zany ideas
where he kind of wanted to challenge the status quo of science. And he said to
me a very simple question at the beginning of my PhD. He said, look, everybody
thinks cosmic dust comes from a star a bit like the sun. And they think that
this pollutes the universe with dust grains, which can go on to form rocky
planets and can form life itself. I'm not sure it can. So these were, we say,
smaller stars like our sun, that when they when they die at the end of their
lives, they sort of shed their outer layer as they cool. And it's a quite a
gentle process. But that's what was thought. That was the consensus. The
textbook description explanation that that's how dust is formed. Absolutely. So
these these kind of fading small stars produce all of the dust that we see in
the universe, produce the building blocks of planets and so on. And he just kind
of had this idea that there are not that many of those stars. But we find that
the universe is polluted with a lot of dust. So could it be that we're missing
something here? So we just made kind of mathematical models and showed that,
yeah, actually it can account for it a little bit of it, but nowhere near
enough. So what was the alternative explanation? At the time, we we put forward
the idea that it could be stars that are very massive. So stars that we know
when they die, they explode quite violently. So we see this supernova supernova.
Yeah. So these explosions of huge stars. And we know in that explosion you get a
huge amount of material, metals that gets flung out in space. But one thing was
thought at the time is that that couldn't make dust. Or if it did make dust, it
would be vaporized because the explosion is very hot. It's not very not very
hospitable place for dust grains, little particles of carbon or silicate. So we
kind of thought, well, OK, nobody believes that dust is formed in these
supernovas, these big explosions. But actually, if we model it, can they explain
this shortfall that we have in the dust budget? And they do. They easily explain
it. You need a little bit of dust per supernova explosion and you can explain
all the dust you see in galaxies. So this was your PhD work. You wrote up your
findings in a paper. This is in 2003. Yes. How was that paper received? We had a
very nasty referees report for that paper. Actually, it was very it was very
critical, but we were able to answer that referees questions and criticisms and
it made the paper a lot stronger. So I believe actually that that process was
really helpful. And then we we kind of went away and we decided to look at a
supernova and to see if that's. Because there's a big difference between solving
an equation and developing a computer model that makes a prediction and actually
looking out there in space to check. Yes. You need to you need to see it with
your own eyes, as it were, or with your telescope eyes. So we decided to look at
a supernova nearby Cassiopeia A and we wrote a paper in Nature to say that, hey,
there's a lot of dust in this supernova. Maybe our theory is correct and maybe
the consensus everyone has where dust isn't produced by these stars is
absolutely not correct or misleading. And that that kind of got quite a lot of
attention, that paper. I mean, not bad for a 24 year old who spent her student
years working in a petrol station to have a paper in Nature so early in your
career. Yeah, I mean, I the thing is, I was really lucky enough to have such
wonderful people to work with. So it was, you know, not only Mike Edmonds, but
also a colleague of mine, Loretta Dern, who who led that work. And, you know, I
did the modelling for it to show it would work. It would fit everything. But it
kind of our high became a low quite quickly because soon after we published a
paper in Nature, a German team published a paper where they said we were wrong.
And that was that was quite interesting. It was just literally our our paper
dust in supernova remnants and their paper was no dust in supernova remnants.
OK, that's quite clear what you mean by that. So what was their argument against
your prediction? They argued, and I think it's a really good argument, that what
we were seeing was not dust in the supernova explosion, but dust between us and
the supernova explosion. So if you imagine you look out with your telescope, you
look for the glow from dust and it's you can pick up all the dust between you
and the supernova. OK, so they thought it might be a dust cloud in the front
that just happened to look like it was in the supernova. And, you know, they
made a good point, except the measurements weren't quite right. So we now know
after other teams have got involved and so on, that actually the you were right.
But at the time, how did it feel then to be to be shot down? You'd had to argue
against the referees for your first paper. Now you have this big paper in
Nature, the most prestigious science journal in the world. And soon after,
you're told you're wrong. I mean, you must have felt a bit down. Yeah, I kind of
felt I don't really care who's right. I care about the science and what it
shows. I mean, I'd be happy to say it was wrong if it was wrong. So I didn't
take it too personally. And of course, it must have felt good when you were.
Yes. Correct. Yeah. Yes, it was very good. So we had a 2009 paper. And since
then, other groups have also verified that, yes, there is a huge amount of dust
in the supernova. And here you were still in your in your mid 20s, mixing it
with the world's top astrophysicists and astronomers. Clearly, you've made it as
a scientist. How did your parents feel? Were they very proud of your
achievements? Yeah, they're very proud. I don't think they quite understand when
I'm talking about papers and referees. It just OK. That's that sounds strange. I
don't think they quite understand, but they've always been really proud. They
understand things more like the NB and things like that. They can kind of grasp
that more. But yeah, they're very proud of me now. OK, here we go. Let's talk a
little bit about the astronomy and how we detect this cosmic dust. Of course,
everything we know about stars and galaxies, we learn from capturing light from
telescopes. There's no other way we can learn about the universe. We can't see
this dust, however, using optical telescopes, visible light, because obviously
the light doesn't get through the dust. But we can detect it directly in the
infrared part of the spectrum because these dust particles radiate heat. That's
right. Yeah. Even things that we think of as cold still have heat. Everything
above absolute zero has heat. And all we need to do to see the heat is use
infrared cameras or goggles. So, you know, we used to kind of see infrared
images of our houses, maybe to look at where heat is escaping. The thermal
imaging, thermal imaging, thermal imaging, infrared cameras. We radiate in the
infrared. We are heat close in the infrared. So we had the challenge as a
community to try and build telescopes that can see this heat from dust grains
and see them glowing in the infrared. Well, in 2009, the Herschel Space
Telescope was launched, and that was a huge leap forward because that's an
infrared telescope. So that that must have made a big difference for how you
could see this dust. Yeah, we had very little idea of what the infrared universe
was like. And the reason I say that is because what makes Herschel special is
its ability to see large bits of the sky, large bits of space. So instead of
just looking at one small patch, you can map a whole area. So instead of 100
galaxies, you now have orders of hundreds of thousands of galaxies. So you're
opening a new window, really, on the universe. And not only that, but it was
able to see different infrared colors. So what I mean by that is it didn't just
look at one type of infrared light. It looked at a huge range of infrared light.
And so it could capture the glow from very cold dust at minus 250 degrees. And
it could capture the glow from very hot dust. So you you could see all the dust
for the first time. And it turns out 90 percent of all the dust in the universe
is actually cold. And no telescope before Herschel saw that. And of course, it
provided a lot of data, a lot of work for astronomers around the world. You
focus in particular on one object in our own Milky Way galaxy, not a distant
galaxy, the Crab Nebula. Why did you focus on the Crab Nebula? Well, I love the
Crab Nebula and I've always loved it. You know, if you imagine the the image,
famous image from the Hubble Space Telescope of these incredible filaments of
gas. This star exploded a thousand years ago in our own galaxy. It was seen,
thought to be seen with the naked eye. And the imagery of it is just incredible,
always has been incredible. It was quite an accident that I managed to analyze
the Herschel observations of this object. It was actually the person who was
supposed to be leading that work didn't get around to it because of other work
constraints. And so they asked me to look at it. So it was a bit accidental. And
I looked at it and I remember getting the data from Herschel. It emails you and
says, oh, your space telescope has taken your data. You're the first person to
see it. You open it and you just think, oh, my gosh, this is the first infrared
view of all of the dust in a supernova remnant. So it was so really is very
visual. It's not like you're dealing with numbers. It's there. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
You literally press a button and it comes from the pipeline from the telescope
and you open it up and you can see the Crab Nebula. You can see the dust in the
Crab Nebula at all different temperatures and you can see where it is. And yeah,
it was quite a surprise. So. So what do you do then once you see this picture?
Well, the first thing I did was think there's a lot of dust. There's a lot more
dust there than I'd expect. And there's a lot more dust there than anybody would
expect. So I made a measurement of how much I thought was there. And it's really
amazing that people think this is complicated, but it's literally year one
undergraduate physics. You take the image of the crab in different wave bands
that Herschel saw and you put a circle or an aperture down and it's down. And
you say how much dust is in this ellipse and you do that in all the different
wave bands. And that tells you how much you have to make it glow the way that it
glows. So blackbody physics, basically. And I did that and I thought, oh, that's
quite a lot. That's a lot of dust. That's 200,000 worth of rocky planets worth
of dust. That's about 200,000 more than people expected. And I just presumed I'd
got it wrong. So I presumed I'd made some mistake. But I mean, this was really
confirming the work that you'd done over the past however many years. I mean,
your PhD work making that prediction that supernovae, these large stars
exploding, produce dust. It was your your nature paper that then got criticized.
Here you were looking at data from this crab nebula, the remnants of a
supernova. So, I mean, you've confirmed what you what you would hope to find.
Why were you still doubting it? Because it was such a big number. You know, I
expected I hope to find some dust. I didn't expect to find this much dust. And
if this is true and all stars explode like the crab nebula, then, you know,
we've got loads of dust in the universe. And that's great. That solves all our
problems. But it is different to what the textbooks say. So I asked my
colleagues to recalculate it blindly. So I gave them the data and said, you do
whatever it is you do to get the amount of dust and we'll compare it. And they
got the same answer. And you published this work in 2012. Yes. Has this now
changed the textbooks description of how dust is made? Somebody needs to write
this textbook, actually, because the original textbook, the original textbook
has not changed. It was in 2003 and it hasn't been updated there. But I am very
pleased to see that now papers and publications are now starting to say dust
comes from stars like our sun. And massive star explosions. I guess the moral of
the tale is if you don't look, you don't find. And also that sometimes
scientific consensus can be wrong. Not always, but sometimes. Or to be more
precise, the scientific consensus is often only part of the truth. Yes. And I
think the lovely thing here is that Herschel opened our opened our eyes, as it
were, into how rich the infrared universe is. And that allowed us to have a
different view on things. So we were able to partner that up with the theory and
the maths. Now, clearly, Haley, this has been your life. I, as a as a fellow
physicist, find it tremendously exciting. But I suspect that there might be
people who are thinking, so what? Who cares how much cosmic dust there is in the
universe? And certainly, why does it matter where it's made? Yeah, I think
that's a valid question. And what I would say to those people is that if, you
know, cosmic dust is really important for assisting stars forming. It's also
important for assisting complex chemistry, things like DNA and so on. You kind
of kind of need some molecules and dust grains in space to form those things.
And so it really is a question of the origin of us, of life and the places where
life could potentially exist. And the thing about the textbook explanation of
dust is that would mean the first stars after the Big Bang, you would need to
wait a billion to 10 billion years before you have those raw materials ready for
life. Because stars like our sun live so long. Exactly. And they it takes such a
long time to get to their death phase, their stellar death. Stars like the ones
that we're looking at, supernovae, they are within 10 million years of the first
stars in the universe. You have the materials for life. So you're kind of
changing the time scales it takes to build up those raw materials for life.
That's kind of what I would say. It's a question of our origin as well as those
little rocks in the space between stars. I mean, to take a line from Bob Dylan,
the answer, my friend, isn't blowing in the wind. It's hidden in cosmic dust.
Oh, yes. But it is quite something, isn't it? To think there's all this cosmic
dust out there that we didn't know about before and how much we've learned from
it. Thanks to work of you and others just in the last decade or two. Absolutely.
And, you know, it seems like a long time ago now, 2009 to 2013. But people are
still going through the data, the rich data that Herschel has taken. And we've
been looking at the half a million galaxies it discovered that, you know, we're
not seeing before. They have seen. You see, that is the other thing, isn't it?
You know, not just are we learning how this dust is made, but now that we have
the instruments that can see the dust, we can sort of see through it. And so
much of the universe was hidden before. Yes. And I think that's what Herschel
has done is not only show, reveal this part of the universe we didn't see
before. So we're seeing things that are odd and strange and then need to be
explained in some way. So, yeah, it's it's it's completely changed our view, I
think, of the universe. And what's lovely, you see these pictures, astronomy
pictures now of, say, a galaxy or supernova, invisible light. And now you can
see the same thing, but in infrared and you can put those two together. And it's
basically giving us a much richer description of the universe than we've had
before. That's right. Yes. And the thing that I always kind of think about is
that dust grains are so small. You know, we talked about foggy day in Cardiff
Bay. That's what dust is like. It's little tiny particles, a bit like a smoky
room or foggy room. They're tiny size. They're a tiny mass of a galaxy. And yet
they can block out 90 percent of the total starlight of a galaxy. So they
profoundly change our view of everything. With Herschel, we kind of get that
missing puzzle back. It's like now suddenly we can see the universe in a bright,
sunny day rather than through the fog. That's right. Exactly. The fog is
clearing. Yes. And all this because you and other scientists started to ask
questions to challenge the consensus and find answers about cosmic dust. Well,
now it's time for some questions from my audience here in Cardiff. And so if you
would like to ask Haley about about her life or about her research on cosmic
dust, raise your hand. And we'll get a microphone to you very quickly. And don't
be shy. And what are you interested in researching next? What are some of your
big questions? Oh, that's a really good one. I've kind of moved back towards the
2003 work, kind of gone full circle. And we are trying to work out what's making
these very extreme galaxies that Herschel has discovered. What makes them tick?
So we don't know why, but they form stars thousand times faster than our galaxy.
So something is different in those. Is it the gas? Is it the more stars form? Is
it that there's more dust? What's going on? So I kind of want to know. I want to
pin down why those things are so weird and so extreme and why we don't see them
in the universe today. I would like to know what would you say to a young
council estate girl from multiple generations of non-working families who would
love to be a scientist but don't think they can because of where they come from?
Well, you can. You definitely can. And I feel like not not being upset by things
that go wrong, actually has made made me push through areas where people might
go. You don't belong here. I have had that. I've had had those experiences. And
I think you kind of use your hard nuts, kind of like, you know, I'm a council
girl or I'm a council boy. And you kind of go, yeah, I can take it. And you just
you can do it. If you like maths, if you like physics, you could be a space
scientist. You could be an astronaut. Yeah. Haley Gomez, thank you very much for
sharing your life scientific. And thank you to my audience here at the Pierhead
building in Cardiff. I'm Jamal Khalili. My producer was Anna Buckley. And of
course, you can listen again on BBC Sounds. Thank you. Thank you. And the Life
Scientific will be back next Tuesday. Now, just before the world tonight, let's
take a quick look at the weather. Tonight, a lot of the UK will be cloudy with
spells of rain pushing east. These could be heavy. Northern Ireland, Scotland,
Northern England and North Wales could see some snow on the high ground. And it
will be breezy in the far west. Tomorrow, much of the UK will see cloud and
spells of rain clear east. Leave sunny spells, but also showers, which could be
wintry on hills. However, east and southeast England will remain mostly cloudy
all day with outbreaks of rain. On 92 to 95 FM, on 198 Longwave, on Digital and
on BBC Sounds. This is BBC News.