TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Monday evening at 8 o'clock. This is Radio 4. It's 5 o'clock and time for PM
with Evan Davis. Hello there. Matt Hancock's WhatsApp message is on Covid. Enter
the public domain. We can't wait for the official inquiry, says the journalist
behind the leak. The Baroness running it disagrees. There will be no whitewash.
We need answers. Well, a lot of discussion about it in Westminster. We'll look
at the reaction there and we'll ask whether official investigations could be
speeded up. We'll also profile the journalist Isabel Oakeshott, who shared the
former health secretary's texts with the Daily Telegraph. Meanwhile, talking
about Covid. The FBI has for quite some time now assessed that the origins of
the pandemic are most likely a potential lab incident in Wuhan. The director of
the FBI goes on to Fox Television to say, while he's not sure, he thinks the lab
leak theory is probably right. We'll hear from a scientist who's sceptical.
House prices seem to be falling in the UK. Is that a good or bad thing? And
Idris Elba on how his detective hero, Luther, makes the leap to the movies. And
that other British figure he's always linked to. I definitely am not tired of
the James Bond rumours. It's one of the biggest compliments one can have as an
actor. We'll start with the BBC News Red today by Tom Sanders. Rishi Sunak has
said the Covid public inquiry is the right way to scrutinise the government's
handling of the Covid pandemic, after Matt Hancock was accused of ignoring the
advice of senior medical officials when he was health secretary. The Daily
Telegraph has obtained WhatsApp messages from Mr Hancock, which suggests he
chose not to test everyone entering care homes in the early stages of the
pandemic. Mr Hancock said the claims were untrue. The government says tough
decisions had to be made when tests were in short supply. Here's our political
correspondent, Ian Watson. A series of messages from April 14th 2020, suggest
that Matt Hancock initially welcomed advice to test everyone going into care
homes in England. He appeared to change his mind later though, and only gave a
commitment to test those who'd come from hospitals. A spokesman for Mr Hancock
said that had been because more widespread testing hadn't been deliverable. Mr
Hancock's spokesman said all of his messages had been handed over to the
official Covid inquiry, which was the proper place to make an objective
assessment. At PMQs, Sir Keir Starmer called for that inquiry to conclude by the
end of the year. The Prime Minister said the inquiry was independent, and that
he wouldn't comment on the piecemeal information that had been leaked. The
parents of a disabled girl who died after becoming morbidly obese have been
jailed for gross negligence manslaughter. Kayleigh Titford from Newtown in Mid
Wales was left lying immobile in bed for more than six months in 2020. Our
correspondent Hal Griffith has been following the case at Swansea Crown Court.
Kayleigh Titford lived with a spinal condition and needed a wheelchair. When the
pandemic forced her school to close, her parents left her lying in squalid
conditions for over six months. Her body became so obese, inflamed and infected,
it couldn't cope. The judge said her parents had allowed her to die in
horrifying circumstances, suffering prolonged neglect. There was plenty of time
to get help for Kayleigh and to put things right for her. In all of that time,
things went from bad to worse. Alan Titford was jailed for seven and a half
years. Sir Lloyd Jones will serve a six-year sentence. The Greek transport
minister has resigned after at least 36 people were killed in one of the
country's worst rail accidents. He said he was taking responsibility for what he
called the long-standing failures of the state, following the collision between
a passenger service and a freight train last night. A station master in the
central city of Larissa has been charged with manslaughter by negligence. Police
searching for a missing baby in East Sussex have been given more time to
question the newborn's parents. Constance Martin and Mark Gordon were arrested
in Brighton on Monday night on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. The
search for the baby is continuing. The government's unveiled plans for an
independent public advocate to help support victims of major disasters such as
Hillsborough and Grenfell. Announcing details of the expert panel in the
Commons, the Justice Secretary Dominic Raab said it would give victims a voice
when they need it most. Here's our Home Affairs correspondent Tom Symons.
Victims of the Hillsborough and Grenfell disasters and their families have
complained of the challenges they've faced over many years, obtaining everything
from health and financial help to information about their involvement in public
inquiries and inquests. The Justice Secretary Dominic Raab has decided against a
single independent public advocate in favour of a permanent panel of experts,
social workers, doctors, ex-civil servants, emergency responders, community
leaders and media advisers. They'll step in to help close families of the
bereaved and those with life-changing injuries. Labour said the proposals should
go further, giving the advocates' panel the power to obtain information for
victims to prevent cover-ups before they start. The video-sharing app TikTok is
introducing a 60-minute daily screen time limit for children after facing
criticism that it's too addictive. If under-18s reach the limit, they'll have to
enter a passcode to continue using the service. Thank you very much, Tom. Now,
it dropped from the Telegraph late yesterday evening, the leak of Matthew
Hancock's Covid WhatsApp messages. The paper will slice them into digestible
stories and release them one at a time and we might get one while we're on air.
But so far, we've had several that Chris Whitty and Patrick Vallance were
concerned about shielding not being very effective. We had one that Jacob Rees-
Mogg had a Covid test couriered to his home for one of his children when testing
services generally were somewhat disrupted. We invited Mr Rees-Mogg,
incidentally, to discuss that allegation. He declined, said he'd be giving his
response on his GB News show later tonight. But above all is the story that Matt
Hancock seemed to ignore Chris Whitty's advice on testing and care homes. Now,
it's worth saying Matt Hancock disputes the Telegraph version of events, but it
concerns WhatsApp's suggesting that Chris Whitty's advice was all going into
care homes should be tested. And that got watered down into the line that those
coming from hospital should be tested. Now, that exchange, incidentally, written
up as Matt Hancock ignored advice on care homes, is not him ignoring any advice
he might have had relating to the discharge of hospital patients into care homes
untested. That occurred in March and early April 2020. That discharge is among
the most controversial pieces of Covid response. But these messages, in fact,
were at the end of that discharge period. And incidentally, the government says
even in mid-April, there weren't enough tests for everybody to get them. So
difficult choices had to be made. Now, for all these revelations, there's no
argument that WhatsApp messages are genuine. What we don't have necessarily is
the full context. There is a public inquiry, a full review into pandemic
handling. But the journalist who released the texts says this is just going to
take too long. Well, how has all this gone down in Westminster today? Ben Wright
is there for us. Ben, give us an overview of the reaction. Well, Evan, it's an
extraordinary leak of private WhatsApp messages that takes us right back to the
time of lockdowns, Covid testing, school closures, the crisis in care homes and
shielding, as you were saying, the early weeks of the pandemic when ministers
and officials were scrambling to respond to the pandemic. And at the centre of
it was Matt Hancock, then the health secretary. He wrote about his experience in
a memoir published last December and had the help of a well-known Westminster
journalist called Isabelle Oakeshott. Mr Hancock shared all these WhatsApp
messages with her, which she has now passed on to the Daily Telegraph. And it is
a remarkable, if very partial, glimpse into the decisions being made at the
time. And you mentioned some of the things we've seen already. We can read Matt
Hancock messaging, for instance, his friend George Osborne, then the editor of
the Evening Standard, asking for front page coverage for his testing target.
There are group chats involving Boris Johnson and the chief medical officer for
England, Professor Chris Whitty. So Westminster is absorbing all of this. They
know that there's more to come. Matt Hancock is clearly livid that this has
happened. And in response to one of the main stories that emerged today over
testing, a spokesman for Matt Hancock said, these stolen messages have been
doctored to create a false story that Matt rejected clinical advice on care home
testing. That, the spokesman said, is flat wrong. Right. There is actually on
that a particular interest in the row over the date April the 14th. Now, just
fill us in on that, Ben. Yeah, pretty early on in the pandemic, there wasn't
very much testing capacity at all. But big discussions going on in Whitehall
about how best to use it. And there's one message that Matt Hancock says sends
to an aide in which he says Professor Chris Whitty said that was recommending
testing for all people going into care homes. That's the suggestion that that
was the recommendation. But the Telegraph says that by the end of that day,
April the 14th, 2020, Matt Hancock appeared to have changed his mind, publishing
a message saying, isolate all going into care from hospital. The message goes
on, I do not think the community commitment adds anything and it muddies the
water. And today, as well as the response I just gave you, a spokesman for Mr
Hancock insisted that just what it was not possible then to test everyone
entering care homes at the time. So he's pushing back very strongly on the
suggestion that he ignored the clinical advice. Ben, thanks for that. Well, what
this public clamour for information about pandemic handling is throw a light on
the inquiry process. Does it all take too long? Now, you might remember the
Chilcot inquiry into the Iraq war. That took seven years. Or the Saville inquiry
into Bloody Sunday. That took 10 years and that was years after the event. The
Grenfell inquiry, still at work, coming up to six years after the tragic fire.
The chair of the COVID-19 public inquiry is Baroness Heather Hallett. And today,
she referred to the Telegraph story at the beginning of proceedings. May I
correct some misunderstandings in the reports of yesterday's proceedings and the
release today of government WhatsApp messages? First, this inquiry will not drag
on for decades. I have been determined from the outset that the inquiry must
reach conclusions and make recommendations as soon as possible if we are to
achieve our aim of learning lessons and reducing suffering in any future
pandemic. That is why I sought the express agreement of the then Prime Minister
to issue interim reports. So with respect to certain commentators, comparisons
to other countries are unhelpful. Furthermore, I wish to emphasise there will be
no whitewash. Baroness Hallett there. Well, there is a desire always for these
things to move faster. And indeed, at Prime Minister's questions today, the
Labour leader, Sakir Starmer, seemed to want more haste. The country deserves
better. The Covid inquiry has already cost the taxpayer £85 million and hasn't
heard from a single government minister yet. So can the Prime Minister assure
the House, no more delays, that the inquiry will have whatever support it needs
to report by the end of this year? Well, Mr Sunak said it was right to leave any
investigation of what happened to that inquiry. And then this afternoon, the
Social Care Minister, Helen Waitley, responded in the Commons to an urgent
question from Labour about the Telegraph's report. It is vital that we learn
lessons. It's equally vital, Mr Speaker, that we learn those lessons in the
right context. I should mention that selective snippets of WhatsApp
conversations give a limited and at times misleading insight into the machinery
of government at the time. That is why the Covid inquiry is so important. So we
have the right preparations in place to meet future threats and challenges. Well
let's hear from someone who has been involved in the process of looking back on
past events to produce an official report. Now Dame Deirdre Hine led the review,
and I say review, not an inquiry, nothing like as big as the Hallett inquiry
just starting. Dame Deirdre Hine led a review into how the UK responded to the
swine flu pandemic in 2009. And I asked her for her reaction to the Hancock
reports. Well I think it's highly unfortunate that has happened. It perhaps was
inevitable, but I think that somebody revealing what they were given in
confidence is most reprehensible in this respect. What is the purpose of either
a review, an inquiry, or a public discussion about leaked texts? Is it to
establish some greater truth about how we handle pandemics? Or is it to pinpoint
blame so that people are held accountable for the mistakes they might have made?
I think probably in an inquiry it's both. In my review I made it absolutely
clear that I was not going to apportion blame, but I was just going to look at
how things could have been done better and make recommendations to that respect.
The trouble with a public inquiry is that the public expects the inquiry to
apportion blame. There is a sort of retribution factor in it, which just
hopefully will not get in the way of making clear judgments about how things
were done. I mean they always say of the airline inquiries, don't they, the lack
of blame culture is why you get to the truth so quickly and why we have so few
plane crashes. They won't be just pointing fingers, they'll be asking how those
mistakes can be made. Well of course it will be up to the inquiry itself to
decide exactly what way they want to treat it and one would hope that it would
be more along the lines of an airline inquiry. There will be lots of things that
might emerge in these leaked texts that wouldn't be the business of the inquiry,
an allegation that a test was couriered to the house of a cabinet colleague for
example when other people weren't getting tests. I don't know, maybe that would
be in Baroness Hallett's remit, but I don't think she would have thought that
would be a big deal for her pandemic lessons inquiry. People might say, you
know, we should find that kind of thing out, we should see how government
behaves. I have every confidence that Baroness Hallett will be taking a very,
very sensible view about things like that and I would expect nothing of that
sort to figure in the inquiry. Your real concern, and we've spoken about this
before, during and after the pandemic, Deirdre, your concern has always been not
that the inquiry takes too long, it's that no one takes any notice of it once
it's deliberated. Absolutely, absolutely. Whether it's a review or an inquiry, I
feel that somebody, and preferably the person who chairs the inquiry or the
review, should be appointed then on a basis of two or three years post-review,
post-inquiry, to ensure that the lessons learned are actually applied by
government departments. When you look at people being appointed to these jobs,
Deirdre, what do you think, oh thank goodness it's not me who's been given
another of these darn things, because they do seem to absorb a very large
portion of people's lives, can be for quite a while. They do, and I think
Baroness Hallett, I think it's not impertinent to say, is very brave to take
this on. I do wish her every success in this. It's really almost an impossible
task because in this inquiry there are so many facets. There are the medical,
clinical, epidemiological, social, educational, environmental, financial and
economic aspects of it all, and I think it's inevitable that it's going to take
time. I would hope that some of the most important lessons necessary for
ensuring that we are properly prepared for the next pandemic, because there will
be another one, that those are learned early and that those are applied early,
because I think, I'm not sure, but I think the intention is to attack this
problem bit by bit and issue reports when each one is concluded. So you have to
break it down, which comes back to this point about whether it might be better
to break it up and to have more than one inquiry. I don't know whether you
really feel that this massive one, overriding inquiry, is the right way. Well I
think it has to be one inquiry, because all of these different facets are
interlinked. So you can't sort of look at one without considering some of the
others, but that doesn't say that you shouldn't do it bit by bit. Well that was
Dame Deirdre Hine, who did lead a review into the swine flu pandemic, a much,
much smaller scale thing than the public inquiry. I should say, just in the last
few minutes, another story has come from the Telegraph. This one relates to
masks at schools, and I suppose you could write it up as kids in England were
required to wear masks in order to avoid a row with Scotland, because Chris
Whitty said he was ambivalent really about whether we needed masks in schools in
England. No strong reason against, no strong reasons for, and then said but not
worth an argument. And Scotland was going down that route. So Boris Johnson
wanting to follow Nicola Sturgeon there. Now it's 19 minutes past five. Let's
have a look at some other headlines now. Here's Tom. The Bank of England Andrew
Bailey has said the economy is behaving broadly as predicted, but that it may be
necessary to increase interest rates further in the coming months. The three
candidates hoping to replace Nicola Sturgeon as leader of the SNP and Scotland's
first minister will hold their first hustings tonight in the Dunbartonshire town
of Cumbernauld. And one of Nigeria's opposition parties is to mount a legal
challenge against the presidential election victory of Bola Tunabu, claiming the
results were rigged. It's Tom. Now a head-on collision between two trains, a
passenger one and a freight train has left at least 36 people dead at the latest
count. It occurred on a route that had been the subject of safety warnings. The
Greek transport minister resigned within hours of the disaster and a local
station master has been arrested and charged with negligent homicide. Greece has
declared three days of national mourning. Well, I spoke to Yanis Papadopoulos,
who's a journalist with the Greek newspaper Katimerini. He described the site of
the crash. It was a shock even for us, for journalists who arrived at the site
this morning. We saw a train that was derailed. The belongings of the
passengers, their seats were thrown on the field. It was a site of a complete
disaster. At least two carriages and the engine of the passenger train were
demolished. It was just wreckage. You couldn't recognize that it was a train
just hours before this horrific accident. Most of the passengers on the train
were young people, students, 25 years old or in their earlier 20s. And talking
later during the day with doctors who received them and tried to provide first
aid in the university hospital of Larissa, most of them were in shock. Some of
them were under severe stress. They couldn't speak or they couldn't focus. They
couldn't provide the right information. And those were people who survived by
chance after this accident. I think you're at Larissa Hospital. Is that right,
Yanis? And it must be, well, they must have really had to be dealing with a
very, very major incident there. Yes, right now I'm close to the General
Hospital of Larissa. It's the second hospital of this Greek city. And at this
hospital, family members, they have given DNA samples for their loved ones who
are still missing or for deceased people who haven't been recognized yet. And
the number of confirmed dead is 36. But those numbers can change within minutes
or within hours. And you've spoken to surgeons at the hospital. Yes, I've spoken
to a surgeon. He told me that last night within an hour and a half, 45 injured
persons arrived at the university hospital. They were under a lot of pressure to
provide for every one of them. At the university hospital of Larissa, they have
four injured people in the ICU. And in total, the injured passengers who are
hospitalized are 72. Yanis, do we have any idea what happened, that these two
trains were on the same track, reportedly for several kilometers? And we know a
local station master has been arrested and charged with negligent homicide. But
any any talk at this early stage of what the cause of this was? It would be too
soon to draw a conclusion, because as you can imagine, the investigation of this
case will take several weeks in order to understand what has really happened.
But for now, we know that the station master, during a preliminary
investigation, he has admitted to making a fatal mistake. Yanis Papadopoulos,
journalist with Katimarini newspaper. Now, what is happening in the housing
market? Interest rates have settled down after the Liz Trust volatility period
of last autumn, but they've settled down at a higher rate than a year ago,
usually something beginning with a four rather than a two or a three. Now,
higher rates mean less affordability, which usually means buyers drive down
prices. And the latest data from Nationwide bear out some effect of that kind
underway, because prices in February were almost 4% below their peak and 1%
lower than a year ago. How are people on the ground feeling the effects? Sally
Mitchell is a senior mortgage broker at The Mortgage Mum. Sally, what is going
on in the market to your observation? Well, it is a bit of a an up and down a
roller coaster, I think we can safely say. Certainly, after the mini budget and
with the cost of living crisis that we're all going through, there were an awful
lot of potential homebuyers who just said, no, not for me, not at the moment.
I'm scared. I don't want to commit to a much higher rate for such a large
financial burden. And of course, that means that there's less demand and has
prices fall. But I would like to get it into a little bit of perspective.
Although we have had a dip, the dip for this month means that the average house
price in January was 258,297. And in February, that's changed to 257,406. So
it's a dip, but it's modest. I really don't want people to think they're wiping
it off their house. It's a small dip so far. The question is, where's it going
and whether it's on the way down? Because there were a lot of predictions, maybe
10% fall this year, and then one or two were saying, it's going to be a lot more
than that. Yeah, I mean, that's not what I'm seeing on the ground. We're seeing
a real influx of interest. We're seeing an awful lot more buyers in the market.
We're seeing an awful lot of sellers in the market as well. It's going to take a
little bit longer for the property market to catch up, but there are green
shoots. And I am optimistically very positive that it's going to be a much
better quarter in the next three months than it has been, certainly. All right,
Sally, thanks for that. Well, let's talk now to Toby Lloyd, who's the author of
a report from the Joseph Rowntree Trust, which expresses a fair bit of worry
that the market, it may become paralyzed. We often think lower house prices are
very helpful to buyers, but not if the market freezes up. No sign of that from
what Sally is saying, but Toby, just talk us through what this fear of a freeze,
where that comes from, what that is. Well, really, this just comes from looking
at what's already happened in the last year or so, but more importantly, from
the history of previous housing market downturns. And what we tend to see is
that, looking at the history, is that when you get a spike in interest rates or
some other kind of shock, like the global financial crisis, you see lots of
homeowners being forced to sell. And therefore, you get more sellers than buyers
and prices fall quite fast. Unfortunately, I don't think we're going to see that
this time around, because homeowners are much, much better insulated against any
potential fall. They simply don't have to sell anymore. They've had decades of
extremely low interest rates. Most homeowners don't even have a mortgage at all.
So they're under no obligation to sell if they feel the price isn't what they
expect. So as a result, you'll just get home sellers essentially going on strike
and waiting for prices to come back. Meanwhile, home buyers are still extremely
squeezed. And as interest rates go up, we'll find ourselves unable to pay those
sort of prices. So you end up in a standoff where the buyers can't afford it,
and the sellers don't want to accept lower prices. So your hypothesis would be a
big drop in transactions. Absolutely. And that's bad for the market. It's bad
for the economy as a whole. It's bad for people's mobility. It means people
can't move when their circumstances change. It means they can't move for work.
It means it's much less business for people like Sally, who we just heard from,
and the furniture sellers and everybody else involved in the transactions. We
should say there's a little bit of an inconsistency between you and Sally here,
isn't there Toby? Because Sally, I mean, Sally may just be an inveterate
optimist, but she definitely doesn't think that the transactions are drying up
at this point. She says there are plenty of sellers. Is there one way of
reconciling the two positions, which is that there are a lot of people who have
been owning buy to let properties, who may not like the higher interest rates,
and who may think, you know what, I'm not making as much from all this renting
malarkey as I'd hoped, and I'm going to sell and get out of that. I mean, that's
certainly a possibility. Unfortunately, at the moment, we've also seen, and
especially over the last 10, 15 years, a huge rise of alternative, much less
socially beneficial opportunities for owners of rental property. So rather than
letting them out in the mainstream private rental market, we're seeing a huge
rise in often quite unregulated and dodgy shortlets, where landlords can make
higher profit margins. So then you end up in a situation where they're not
selling, so you don't get the benefit for homeowners, nor are they putting them
out for long-term let, which is partly why we're seeing private rents going
through the roof. And yet, private renters are the most damaged group in the
housing market at the moment, and instead arise as these quite exploitive,
unregulated, and often invisible shortlet sectors. Such a complicated thing, the
housing market, so many different pieces to it. Toby, thanks for that. Toby
Lloyd, one of the authors of that Joseph Rowntree Trust, JRF, Joseph Rowntree
Foundation report that emerged today. Now, 29 minutes past five, and Michael
Burke is in the PM studio to tell us about the Moral Maze today. Michael. God
seems to have more than a walk-on part in the race to be Scotland's new leader.
The first hustings will be held tonight in a contest that's been dominated by
faith rather than politics. A former frontrunner, Kate Forbes, looks now to be
the backmarker, having acknowledged that her membership of the Evangelical Free
Church of Scotland means she's opposed to gay marriage and having children out
of wedlock. The old beliefs have collided with the new religion, as some see it,
of human rights. Time was a successful politician had to at least pretend to be
religious. What's changed, and is it for the better? The Moral Maze, after the
news at eight tonight. Thank you very much, Michael. From one celebrity, you're
going to be hearing from Idris Elba later on the programme, so don't turn PM
off. But it's now 29 minutes, no, half past five, and this is PM, and we'll have
a summary of the news from Tom Sanders. The government has said it needed to
take tough decisions on prioritising Covid tests at the start of the pandemic,
after the Daily Telegraph accused the former Health Secretary, Matt Hancock, of
ignoring advice from senior medical officers. The paper, which has obtained
thousands of Mr Hancock's WhatsApp messages, says they suggest he rejected
guidance to test everyone entering care homes in England. Mr Hancock has
strenuously denied the claim, accusing the Telegraph of creating a false story.
While we've been on air, further messages have been released by the Telegraph in
relation to schools. They suggest the government decided to make masks mandatory
in schools in England to avoid a row with Scotland, which had already introduced
the measure. The government has yet to respond to the claims. The parents of a
disabled teenager who died following shocking and prolonged neglect at the
family home in Mid Wales have been jailed. Kayleigh Titford from Newtown was 16
and 22 stone when she died at the family home in October 2020. Her father, who
was found guilty of gross negligence manslaughter, was sentenced to seven and a
half years. The teenager's mother, Mary, was sentenced to six and a half years
in prison. The teenager's mother, Sarah Lloyd-Jones, who admitted the same
charge, was jailed for six years. Three days of national mourning have been
declared in Greece after at least 36 people were killed in one of the country's
worst railway accidents. A passenger train collided with a freight service near
the central city of Larissa last night. The Greek transport minister has
resigned and the local station master has been charged with manslaughter. Police
conducting a huge search for a missing baby in the Brighton area say they want
to keep the child's parents in custody for another 36 hours. Constance Martin
and Mark Gordon are being questioned on suspicion of gross negligence
manslaughter after their arrest on Monday. Detectives still don't know the
whereabouts of the baby. And a commission set up by the England and Wales
Cricket Board has begun hearing evidence about the racism allegations made by
the former Yorkshire player Azeem Rafiq. The club and seven individuals have
been charged with bringing the game into disrepute. Thanks Tom. Now there was a
big Covid story that occurred overnight. It's been easy to miss amid the
Telegraph WhatsApp leaks but it was the director of the FBI on American
television, Fox News, reiterating that the Bureau thinks Covid was probably the
result of a lab leak. Now once that was seen as a theory emanating from
conspiratorial thinking and that the prosaic truth was that Covid virus emerged
in a Wuhan wet market. But the FBI has clearly moved on. Be clear it's not
proclaiming any certainty over this but does think it was probably a lab leak.
Here's the clip from Christopher Wray, the FBI director. The FBI has for quite
some time now assessed that the origins of the pandemic are most likely a
potential lab incident in Wuhan. The FBI has folks, agents, professionals,
analysts, virologists, microbiologists, etc. who focus specifically on the
dangers of biological threats which include things like novel viruses like Covid
and the concerns that in the wrong hands some bad guys, a hostile nation state,
a terrorist, a criminal, the threats that those could pose. So here you're
talking about a potential leak from a Chinese government controlled lab that
killed millions of Americans and that's precisely what that capability was
designed for. Well back in 2021 the World Health Organization did look into
this. There was a joint WHO-China investigation which found the lab leak theory
was extremely unlikely. That investigation has been criticized though and the
WHO has subsequently said all hypotheses remain open and require further study.
Science perhaps still divided on this. I spoke to Angela Rasmussen, a virologist
at the Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization in Canada. I spoke to her
earlier. So this has been really challenging. Both the Department of Energy and
the FBI have really reiterated their conclusions to low and moderate confidence
that it came from a lab but neither agency has released the evidence that they
used to come to those conclusions. So my conclusions really are based on the
evidence that we do have and that we do know and without a doubt, undisputably,
work that I have done with a number of other colleagues around the world has
shown that really the only explanation for the early cases, for the presence at
the Wanan Seafood Market, for the early gene sequences of the virus is that the
virus emerged through two separate zoonotic spillovers in association with the
live animal trade at the Wanan Seafood Market in Wuhan and it did not in fact
come from a lab. So just summarize for listeners who think it's just too
coincidental that there's a Covid research lab in Wuhan and it pops up at a wet
market, you know, next door and we're all thinking it's only about the wet
market, not about the lab. Just what is the kind of the, if you like, the simple
scientific explanation for that coincidence? Well I think that the general
public might not be aware but actually there's a lot of cities around the world
and a lot of other cities in China that also have labs that are working on SARS-
related coronaviruses and bat coronaviruses. So it's actually not that much of a
coincidence. I think what people really need to understand is that spillovers of
coronaviruses and other viruses too, zoonotic spillovers, spillovers from
animals to humans, happen all the time. Most of the time this doesn't result in
an epidemic or a pandemic because it's usually a dead end. Either the virus
isn't well adapted or people are not around each other. What people really need
to think about here is not the fact that there's a coronavirus lab in Wuhan,
it's that Wuhan is a city. So this virus had the opportunity to spill over in
Wuhan and then it had the opportunity to establish human-to-human transmission.
The likelihood that this would happen normally is very, very low because as I
said, spillover happens a lot. It just doesn't usually result in onward
transmission. It's happening in a city and that is the part that's significant.
It's not insignificant, of course, that there is a coronavirus lab there, but
there are many other cities in China that also have coronavirus labs doing
similar work. This could have emerged in Guangzhou, it could have emerged in
Beijing, it could have emerged in Shanghai, it could have emerged in any of the
major cities in China that do have coronavirus research labs and not been
associated with the lab. It does seem though as though China's been rather cagey
about it. The WHO went in, they were allowed to investigate, but very much under
Chinese supervision and after their investigation they were, well, all
hypotheses are still open once they'd really had a chance to digest what they'd
seen. That's correct. So, I mean, we do need to make sure that we have an open
mind to new pieces of data, which is why I really would like to see eventually
what the data is or the evidence is that the FBI and the Department of Energy
are making their decisions based on. But I really do think that just because the
Chinese government is not being completely forthcoming, that doesn't
automatically mean they're trying to cover up a lab leak. And in fact, we do
have some evidence that in fact they tried to cover up actually the association
with the live animal trade, which is highly lucrative and was also the exact
mechanism by which SARS coronavirus 1 emerged 20 years ago. So there is an
incentive to obscure zoonotic origins as well as a lab origin. And I think
people really do need to think about that. We also have some evidence that
actually that there were attempts to obscure a zoonotic origin at the Wanan
Seafood Market. For example, the market was shut down. All of the animals were
removed. Witnesses told the WHO mission in 2021 that there were no live animals
there. And we know that there were. We actually know which animals and how many
were there. And many of them are susceptible to SARS coronavirus 2. And further
on, the farms in the surrounding area in Hubei province were also shut down.
That could have potentially been the source of an infected animal that was
brought to that market. So I do think that there certainly are pieces of
information that are uncovered or that are being concealed, but they're not
necessarily indicative of a lab leak. We do know that much of this evidence that
is being concealed is in fact related to the live animal trade. Well, that was
Angela Rasmussen, sceptical that it was a lab leak, the FBI thinking it probably
was. I have to say, I don't want to cast doubt on US intelligence, but I just
dropped on Reuters is the fact that when they were investigating Havana
syndrome, remember these conditions in people in the embassy in Cuba, they
considered extraterrestrials were responsible for it, but ultimately ruled that
out. That's just a report from about US intelligence and its thinking on Havana
syndrome. Now, 2035 is the target date for the UK to decarbonise electricity
production. It's a big step to net zero because we're going to increase the use
of electricity and cars and heating while taking the fossil fuels out of
electricity. But the National Audit Office has now run a slide rule over
government plans and found there isn't one really, and that the 2535-2035 target
may be missed. Labour, by the way, want green electricity even more quickly. I
spoke to Simon Bittlestone from the National Audit Office, who laid out what the
target involves. In 2021, the government established an ambition to decarbonise
the power sector by 2035, subject to ensuring there's a secure supply. Now,
achieving that ambition entails a number of challenges. Firstly, expanding
generation, particularly offshore wind and nuclear power at a rate that hasn't
been achieved in the past, but also a wider modernisation of the system in other
areas, such as the expansion of networks, changing market arrangements and
potentially updating the way that we all use electricity so that it's more
flexible. What is the plan? They can't announce a target without some idea about
about how you're going to get there. The government has been working on a
delivery plan, but understandably over the past year or so, it has had to scale
back some of that work by needing to deal with rising energy bills and ensuring
that homes and businesses have support to pay their bills this winter. The
responsibility for achieving this ambition now sits with a new department, the
Department for Energy Security and Net Zero. And that's taken on the
responsibility from its predecessor, BASE, which had established an energy
portfolio office to coordinate work across the department and establish a
delivery plan that would set out how the ambition to 2035 would be achieved. It
had been aiming to have a first draft of that delivery plan by October last
year, but because it's had to scale back its planning work whilst dealing with
the short-term challenges of rising energy bills, it's still working on that
draft. Even if you came up with a plan by tomorrow afternoon, is there time to
actually deliver it by 2035? Well, one of the things we've said in our report is
that establishing the delivery plan is an opportunity for the department to
understand the resilience of its approach, particularly around offshore wind and
nuclear, where meeting its ambitions will mean needing to address a number of
challenges around investment, site availability, workforce and supply chains.
It's also an opportunity to identify and fill some gaps. One that we've pointed
to in our report is around ensuring that the system is resilient on the sort of
cold, windless days when you're not getting as much power from wind farms. At
the moment, that gap is filled by gas-fired power stations, which will need to
be phased out in some way if decarbonisation is to be achieved. There's a number
of options available for governments to do that, from storage to hydrogen, and
as I said, the sort of greater flexibility on the demand side. But what we
pointed to in our report is that those options will take time to develop to
ensure that they're ready by the mid-2030s and that the government needs to
establish a clearer, critical path. We should say up to this point, the UK has
done pretty well, in fact, I think probably as well or better than any G20
country at actually delivering emissions cuts relative to to 1990, haven't we? A
lot of that down to gas being used for electricity, so it's not like we haven't
used some low-hanging fruit there, but this country has been pretty successful
compared to most. Yes, that's right. The reduction in emissions in the power
sector since 1990 is 73%. Despite that, it does still represent 13% of the UK's
total emissions, and the way that the government plans to achieve net zero will
see other sectors, particularly transport and heating and homes, switching to
electricity, which will mean increasing demand by up to 60% by 2035. So the
challenge isn't just in reducing the remaining emissions, it's also in meeting
those increasing demands, and it's both around expanding generation at a rate in
offshore wind and nuclear that's faster than has been achieved in the past, but
it's also a broader challenge around, as I've said, sort of expanding networks,
modernising market arrangements and potentially changing how consumers use
electricity. So it's a multi-faceted challenge that really requires governments
to be understanding the links between those different aspects and planning ahead
how they're going to manage them. All right, that was the National Audit Office
view of delivering zero carbon electricity by 2035. Simon Bittleston from that.
Now, coming up to quarter to six, let's have a last look at some other
headlines. Here's Tom. Police in Northern Ireland investigating the attempted
murder of a senior officer in Oma last week have arrested a further two men. The
head of the World Health Organisation has urged the international community to
do more to help northwest Syria recover from the recent earthquake, saying we
must not close our eyes to the suffering there. The Met Office says England had
its driest February in 30 years, with an average of just 15.3 millimetres of
rain falling. Thanks, Tom. Now, among the talking topics for journalists this
morning, with the Telegraph's release of Matt Hancock's WhatsApp messages, was
why did he give them to Isabel Oakeshott, the journalist who helped him with his
book, who then passed them on to the Telegraph? It was a big leap of trust to a
journalist who has strong views, who was sceptical about lockdowns and has a
track record of exposing things. Isabel Oakeshott is well known in Westminster
and among journalists. So who is she? The BBC's Culture and Media Editor, Katie
Roussell, is with me. So who is Isabel Oakeshott, Katie? Well, OK, let's explain
it a little. You know, in her career, she has moved from being a more sort of
straightforward political journalist, she was political editor at the Sunday
Times, she was political editor at large at the Mail, to more of a pundit, you
know, as you said, an ardent Brexiteer, Covid lockdown opponent, a presenter on
talk TV. She has a history of breaking high profile stories. And listeners might
well remember some of them. You know, there was the story about Chris Hune, the
former Lib Dem cabinet minister who went to prison in 2013 after Isabel
Oakeshott revealed from his wife, Vicky Price, that he'd broken speeding laws.
And Vicky Price, who'd taken his speeding points, was also jailed. In 2019, in
the Mail on Sunday, she reported on leaked cables that showed Britain's then US
ambassador, said Kim Darroch, had made derogatory comments about President Trump
and Darroch had to resign. She's also done some pretty high profile stories
about Prince Andrew's finances. She famously wrote a book with Lord Ashcroft
about David Cameron, which included, people might remember this, an
unsubstantiated allegation about a sex act on a dead pig's head. Yes, Evan,
you're laughing. And she ghost wrote the bad boys of Brexit, the Aaron Banks
book, which, of course, you know, she has her detractors. She doesn't mind
stirring things up a bit. But Julia Hartley Brewer, who's a fellow talk TV
presenter and anti-lockdown campaigner, told me this about Isabel Oakeshott.
Isabel Oakeshott is one of those Marmite journalists. Some people love to love
her. Some people love to hate her. But everyone's got an opinion on her. The
reality is she's a damn good journalist. She breaks stories. She gets scooped.
Neither Isabel nor I like to play the woman card. But I do find it fascinating
when male journalists get great scoops, like Isabel Oakeshott does. They're
hailed as great, groundbreaking journalists. When Isabel or any other woman gets
these scoops, then they're somehow dishonest, untrustworthy. They get called
words like vile and the like. Julia Hartley Brewer there. Well, there are plenty
of people saying today, Katie, that Hancock was unwise to give her so much,
basically. Well, that's true. I mean, some today have said exactly that, and
that he should have been more careful. They're saying that, you know, when she
goes, wrote, for example, the Aaron Banks, bad boys, a Brexit book, that diary
style account of the referendum, he gave her access to emails and texts. She
later published them in a newspaper, arguing that there was an overwhelming
public interest to do so, and that it was in the national interest. So, you
know, we heard obviously from Julia Hartley Brewer saying that about perhaps
Isabel Oakeshott being treated differently as a woman. Of course, other people
are more critical. This is what the Guardian's media editor, Jim Waterson, told
me today about Isabel Oakeshott. A woman who is very happy to get stuck in, be
an active player in journalism, but has got a bit of a reputation perhaps for
you have to be careful how you deal with her. And certainly a few of the
political journalists and Tory officials I've spoken to today are more than
anything astonished that Matt Hancock decided to give all of his personal
messages to someone who very publicly opposed most of his policy platform when
it came to lockdown. All right, Katie, does she have a defence to publish Matt
Hancock's WhatsApps? Well, she hasn't denied that she signed an NDA, a
confidentiality agreement, when she wrote the pandemic diaries book, and he
handed over all those WhatsApps. But it wasn't, as I understand it, a commercial
arrangement. What lawyers are telling me is that, you know, clearly, Telegraph
and she and their lawyers have decided it's in the public interest. And she
wrote a piece in the Telegraph saying exactly that. Lawyers have also said to me
that actually, it's very unlikely, they probably decided it's pretty low risk
that he would sue based on the fact that it is in the public interest, and he
wouldn't look great if he did. So you know, that in a sense is the defence.
Katie Rattle, thanks so much. It is already showing at select cinemas, it comes
to Netflix next week. Luther, the Fallen Son, a feature length canvas on which
Idris Elba can develop the character of his dodgy but brilliant detective John
Luther. I need to stop this man. I'm still a copper. Not anymore. And if you
refuse to stand down, tactical unit will shoot you dead. Well, no spoilers, but
the film does have a certain violent edge. It's a thriller, seat of the edge
stuff. I, edge of the seat stuff, I spoke to Idris Elba and the film's director,
Jamie Payne, earlier today. First, Jamie, who was involved in series five of the
TV Luther, on having more time and money to take it into movie land. I've had
the blessing over the years of hearing many ideas that people didn't get to
hear. I know Idris has as well, set pieces and ideas that would have just been
an imbalance in the TV series. Just from a sheer practical point of view, one
thing couldn't take too much focus away from the rest of the hour. So the film
allowed us to use every resource possible to make it as immersive as possible.
Yeah. Idris, you get tired, I'm sure, of being asked about James Bond. But what
is very interesting about this film is that a lot of reviewers have noted a kind
of Bond vibe about it. Were you aware of that as the film was being made? No, I
mean, there's no such thing as a Bond vibe. I think what there is, is a genre of
characters that sort of fill this sort of space, this sort of conviction, go
get, how catch him, outsmart. And I think you can see it in Ethan Hunt, you can
see it in Jason Bourne, you can see it obviously in James Bond, and perhaps
there's a recognizability with John Luther. I definitely am not tired of the
James Bond rumors. It's one of the biggest compliments one can have as an actor.
But ultimately, I always said that our film gets anywhere, sort of, not
comparison, but anywhere it sort of feels that the real estate that the Bond
films have managed to do for decades, then we're doing something good. We
started off in the small screen, we had ambitions to go from one season to
another. And now we have a larger landscape to play in. And so, you know, high
cost problems. Hang on, Idris, is this a franchise then? Do we think this is the
first of a sequence of Luther movies? I'd like to say absolutely yes. I, you
know, I live in part of a team that have ambitions to see more Luther stories,
you know, we've got such amount, we've got so much that we don't know about John
Luther, his capabilities that we haven't been able to answer in the TV shows.
And now we have this landscape that we can do. Hang on, who's going to play him
when you retire out of the role and the franchise has still got loads of life in
it and you have to be replaced, James Bond style? I think when Sean Connery said
something about, you know, who's going to play him after he he he stops playing
it and he said something like, we'll have to see. Idris, not everybody likes
coming home from a day at work and then turning on the TV and watching
psychological and physical torture. But there are people who do. Have you have
you managed to get your head around why people find this entertaining? Look, I
don't think anyone finds violence, you know, grotesque violence entertaining as
as much as they find it engaging, invigorating. And in terms of getting your
senses, our natural senses alive, quite frankly, I think that that's something
we're all sort of naturally drawn to some way or another. When you drive past a
car crash, you all look, don't we? We don't just drive past it, not wanting to
see it. However, I think that, you know, there is the age old escapism, you
know, that art is allowing us to have, you know, telling stories. And so we try
very carefully to be realistic to our world, our hyper world, our Lutherland, as
we say, but at the same time, sensitive to what people may find way too much.
And it's a hard place to calibrate. But, you know, it is on our minds as
producers and directors and storytellers of this IP. I mean, Jamie, in this
film, there is a lot of violence. And it's fair to say it's equal opportunities
violence. It's not all directed against women in particular, but there are,
aren't there? There are a lot of worries about the degree to which violence
against women has become a form almost of carrying a vehicle for entertainment.
You know, I think it's great that there are a lot of very different lenses on
stories now, challenging tropes. I think the stories that have gone should be
existed and should exist and be unedited. But I do feel that we have a
responsibility, you know, in how we balance and tell stories going forward. And
I'm glad that we're all having a very, very active conversation on what you've
just mentioned. You know, violence against women is one of them and there are
many others. So I think, you know, we as humans, we're endlessly fascinated by
what the human being is capable of doing at its darkest. And I think the fact
that we absolutely, there's a dark part of the story towards the end. You know,
we took it to a very different part of the world. And for me and for Idris and
for Neil, you know, that allowed us to remind the audience we're in a very much
a constructed environment. We never want to be too triggering with the violence
in any way. So when we do go into another dark part of the story that violence
is a part of, you know, it leans more towards the monster movie, more of the
kind of Grimm's fairy tale with a knight errant in the timelessness of Luthor at
the centre of it, if that makes sense. But I think it's important that all
stories are challenged now. Just moving on to more general matters, Idris, we
live in an era of identity politics. We talk about groups, their identities,
their cultures, their oppression a lot. You have said as humans, we're obsessed
with race and that that can hinder people's aspirations and you don't want to be
labelled a black actor. I just wonder if you can tell us more about that, that
feeling, because obviously there are others who think we should really, really
be talking about race and that there are a lot of, there's a lot of unfinished
business there. Yeah, I think it's really important to remember under this sort
of guide of a, someone that lives in the public eye, speaking his own personal
opinion and personal life into existence in a journalism piece, that it stands
for me. I don't speak for anyone else. I speak for Idris. And so I honestly
really, I'm not here to debate what my opinion is about race. I'm absolutely
encouraging of people talking about it because it should be. But to me, my
opinion stands, you know, once we are obsessed about it, we're always going on
about it and we forget about our similarities because we're so obsessed with
what makes us different. Yeah. Idris, you did say to the House of Commons
committee that you went to the US, you emigrated to the US for those big roles
because you thought maybe there was a sort of lack of ambition for black actors
here. Firstly, has that changed? But you've come back now, right? You're living
in the UK again now. I live in the UK. I didn't say that I went to America
because there was no ambition for black actors. That's not the case. It's just
that America had a much larger landscape of work for many different types of
cultures. So at the time I moved in the mid-90s, late 90s, there were 200
channels on American soil and there was four in this country. So there was
clearly a marketplace ratio that I was leaning into. And in the House of
Commons, you know, I wanted to really amplify that our TV should look a bit more
like the society we come from. Yeah. And Idris, are you happy in the UK? There
are lots of people who say everything's going wrong in this country at the
moment. This is a time to emigrate and go somewhere, maybe somewhere sunny or
rich or a way you can buy tomatoes on supermarket shelves. Are you feeling that
at the moment or are you feeling it's all going OK here? I think that this is
where, you know, home is where the heart is. So for those who feel less at home
here need to check what's going on in their heart and their souls. That's really
what I think. I think there are many more people now feeling displaced than
before. And, you know, I think we're all feeling a little displaced. You know,
the world's in a very jagged, fractured state right now. Idris Elba and Jamie
Payne and that Luther film coming to Netflix on March 10th. And here it is
coming up to two minutes to six, which means it's time to get some weather. And
it is Chris Fawkes today. Chris. Hi, Ben. Well, it feels like nothing's really
changed very much over the last few days. We've had high pressure in charge of
our cold northeasterly winds and for many of us, we've had a lot of cloud
overnight tonight. We are going to see some subtle changes with where we start
to see skies clear. So, for example, across East Anglia, the south, middle and
southern counts of England overnight, we are going to get some clearer skies
coming in from the near continent and the cloud clears off. It will eventually
turn cold with some patches of frost developing. Low temperatures for these
areas down to about minus two. We've also got some clearer skies across the very
far north of Scotland that will slide in across the Highlands as we go on
through the night. This is another place that's going to have some low
temperatures overnight. I suspect we'll see a widespread frost and temperatures
probably down to about minus four or so. Really through the rest of us, though,
for southern and eastern areas of Scotland, Northern Ireland, Northern England,
North Midlands, most of Wales, I think it's just going to stay pretty cloudy
overnight still with some patches of light rain or drizzle coming and going. But
the cloud stopping the frost, so temperatures for these areas around three to
six degrees Celsius tomorrow, loads more sunshine across southern England, parts
of East Anglia, the south, midlands, southern Wales should also see some
sunshine across the northwest of Scotland sliding into western counties of
Northern Ireland. But that still leaves eastern and southern Scotland, eastern
counties of Northern Ireland, Northern England, North Midlands, North Wales with
thick layers of cloud where we'll probably see fairly widespread patches of
light rain or drizzle temperatures around eight to ten degrees. Quiet weather
continues into the weekend, but I have to say next week's looking quite
different, a lot colder and for some of us, some snow. Evan. All right, thanks
for that, Chris. Now that's PM for today. Our studio director was David Evans,
our editor Alicia Cairo. Do keep in touch, pm at bbc.co.uk.