TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Hello, coming up next it's business matters right here on the BBC World
Service. Today mass protests in Sri Lanka as the worst economic crisis since
independence deepens. The government has a fundamental problem that it has lost
its legitimacy. People just don't have confidence. We'll be coming up in
Colombo, Sri Lanka shortly. Also today, for years diabetes sufferers in the US
have felt they've been taxed for their condition. We'll tell you why one big
drunk company's move could change all of that. And as we're told to fly less and
travel shorter distances, is tourism really the economic boost many countries
hoped it was? We'll be in Europe and Asia to hear how you get tourism right. And
we're in Berlin, where Germany is paying people to party. So join us for our
very own, well, party of sorts on business matters right here on the BBC World
Service. Hello I'm David Harper with the BBC News. The United States has
denounced comments by Israel's far-right finance minister, Betzalel Smotrich,
who had called for the Palestinian village of Huwara to be wiped out by the
state of Israel. The village in the occupied West Bank was the scene of a
rampage by Jewish settlers on Sunday. David Willis reports. Betzalel Smotrich,
who leads a pro-settler party, was quoted as saying he believed the village
needed to be, as he put it, erased. Mr Smotrich later said his comments had been
misinterpreted by the media, but he nonetheless doubled down by saying that
Huwara had become a terrorist outpost, as he put it, for those intent on
launching attacks against the Jews. In response, the US State Department
spokesman Ned Price called the comments irresponsible, repugnant and disgusting,
and called on Benjamin Netanyahu and other senior Israeli officials to publicly
disavow them. Palestinian leaders have welcomed the State Department's
denunciation. Greece's Prime Minister has blamed tragic human error for the
country's worst rail disaster. Kyriakos Mitsotakis had earlier visited the site
of Tuesday's head-on collision between two trains. Nick Beek is at the site of
the crash. This is Greece's worst railway crash, and it shouldn't have happened.
A 59-year-old signal master working in the city of Larissa, 15 miles away, has
been charged with manslaughter by negligence. Visiting the carnage, Greece's
Prime Minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, promised to find out what had gone so
catastrophically wrong. But who to blame is not a straightforward question.
There have been repeated concerns over the lack of signals in Greece, with many
drivers reported to receive instructions over mobile phone calls. This evening,
the transport minister resigned, saying his efforts to improve a railway that
was, he claimed, not fit for the current century hadn't been enough to prevent
such an accident. More than half of Argentina was left without power for several
hours on Wednesday after a fire affected the national electricity grid. With
more, here's Will Grant. With the South American nation still in its summer
months, much of the country is experiencing a heatwave and a drought, with
temperatures in some regions consistently above 35 degrees. An estimated 20
million Argentinians have been affected by the blackout at its height, and daily
life has been brought to a halt in some regions, with classes suspended and
businesses shuttered. The biggest complications are in the major cities. An
estimated 150,000 people are still without power in the Buenos Aires
metropolitan area. The blackout is believed to have been caused by a large fire
in the coastal region, which brought down crucial power lines and forced a
nuclear power station called Atucha 1 to be taken offline out of caution. Will
Grant, World News from the BBC. New York City has agreed to pay just over
$21,000 each to hundreds of demonstrators who were penned in by police during
racial justice protests in 2020. It follows a lawsuit brought by five of the
demonstrators, who accused officers of a brutal response to the protests that
followed the murder of George Floyd by Minneapolis police officers. The tactics
sparked an outcry at the time, but were defended by the city's then-mayor, Bill
de Blasio. A new US intelligence assessment says it's very unlikely the symptoms
known as Havana syndrome were caused by an energy weapon or a foreign adversary.
The symptoms, including pressure in the head and nausea, were first reported at
the US embassy in Cuba in 2016. The White House press secretary, Karine Jean-
Pierre, said staff would continue to receive support. We understand that people
truly went through an ordeal and that's something that clearly our colleagues
and their families had to deal with. So our commitment and the present
commitment to the health and safety of US government personnel remains
unwavering and this is why the departments and agency will continue to provide
timely care as we look at the medical care and make sure that the reports are
thorough, support research efforts and process Havana Act payments as requested.
Ornithologists are celebrating the sighting of a dusky tetrica, a yellow-
throated songbird native to Madagascar, which was feared to have become extinct.
The bird had not been seen since 1999, but three have been sighted in recent
weeks near rivers in the biodiverse rainforests of northeast Madagascar.
Analysis shows that last year's NASA mission to change the course of an asteroid
by smashing into it with a spacecraft was surprisingly successful. Time-lapse
video reveals that the probe, travelling at six kilometres a second, collided
with the asteroid. It caused the space rock to speed up its orbit four times
more than predicted. The impact shot a thousand tonnes of rubble into space. BBC
News Hello and welcome to Business Matters on the BBC World Service. We'll be
back with you today. Thanks to you for rejoining us as well. In just a moment,
we'll head to Sri Lanka following a day of furious protests at the conditions
imposed to try and tackle the country's worst economic crisis since
independence. Also today, is tourism a genuine economic driver or just a driver
of stereotypes? There's nothing like Americans celebrating Irishness for sure.
We'll see whether that translates into actual dollars and euros in the second
half of the programme when we take a bit of a longer look at tourism. As always,
we'll be joined by a couple of guests throughout the programme. From Sydney,
Australia, Dr Yoko Ishikura, Professor Emeritus at Hitoshibashi University,
currently a member of the World Economic Forum's expert network. Normally, of
course, listeners will know, Yoko, you're in Tokyo, Japan normally. What are you
doing in Sydney at the moment? Well, right now, I'm trying to implement my
three-base idea of world and trying to find the three bases that I can spend
like a month and a half or so a year. And Australia, Sydney is one of the
candidates because it's in the southern hemisphere and it's still a difference.
So I picked up the US, North America and Europe, but not yet the southern
hemisphere yet. Diane Brady, I'm certainly feeling moderately inferior already.
Very few seconds into the programme, but Diane, Managing Editor of Forbes,
joining us from New York City. Welcome back, Diane. Great to have you with us.
Yes. Thank you. Nice to be here. And I aspire to a three-base life. Me too. In
fact, two bases will do me right now at this time of night here in the UK, but
plenty for us to get to. So looking forward to having your company over the next
hour. We're going to kick off in Sri Lanka, as I mentioned, though. Protesters
on the streets of the capital, Colombo, there, angry at recent tax rises imposed
by the government as the country faces what is its worst economic crisis since
independence. Those tax rises too part of a government agreement with the
International Monetary Fund in terms of securing a vital bailout to try and
bring that particular economic crisis to an end. More from the guests in a
moment about some of that element of it in particular. But first, we spoke to
opposition MP and former finance minister, Iran Wikram Ratna a little bit
earlier. He was in Colombo. I think there's no debate that government revenue
has sunk to about 8% of GDP, and therefore government revenue must be raised. So
I don't think we are debating on that fundamental issue. What we are debating is
from where do you actually take that? Whom do you tax is really the question.
And I think that having a low tax free threshold doesn't help. So you need to
increase the tax free threshold so that people are not pushed into dependency.
And then clearly upper income earning groups will have to pay more because there
is clearly taxes or revenues have to be raised. What about factors outside the
very direct ones that ordinary people are having to deal with, Aaron? Because I
know that you've been very concerned about the flea of foreign companies at the
moment. Yes, so the government has a fundamental problem that it has lost its
legitimacy. People just don't have confidence. There was a light rail project
which had been worked on for five years with the Japanese and the Japanese
giving long term 40 year loans at low interest rates. This government came in
and just cancelled it. So that was terrible. Loss of confidence. How do you
restore that confidence then? Because that doesn't sound easy or quick either.
Yes. So I think one of the big issues that is face to face that Gautam Rajapaksa
was president elected. He lost his legitimacy, though he was legal. He had to
go. Then we have a new president. He's legal, but his legitimacy is in question
because he hasn't come with a mandate. Parliament, which I belong to myself,
also we are legal, but people are questioning our legitimacy. So to establish
legitimacy, you can't do it short of actually an election. Can Sri Lanka afford
an election right now, though? OK, in terms of money, you can afford it because
it's just peanuts, because the money you need for an election is about 0.4% of
what the government is spending a day. In other words, 40% of a day is the
expenditure of the government. So the argument about finance is absolute
nonsense. It's not true at all. And I think confidence comes by creating
political stability and then only the economic fundamentals could be really
implemented. A lot of anger pointed towards the IMF as well. Do you think once
that political framework is shaken out and whoever is in charge, that perhaps
looking at some of the deals with the IMF again need to be looked at again,
actually, in terms of the long term conditions, the long term agreements with
them? Yes, always. It's easy to blame a third party and therefore the IMS can
become the target. The fact of the matter is, because you asked a question about
loss of confidence, everybody complains that the system is corrupt. But the new
government hasn't still taken any serious measures in terms of making the Anti-
Corruption Commission independent. Law was drafted. It hasn't been brought in.
Then we have basically presented a private members bill and I have presented it
myself saying that public figures like ourselves and government officials should
make their asset declarations public. Government hasn't brought that in. Then
the Stolen Assets Recovery Program of the United Nations, new bill can be
brought in. Government hasn't brought it. It needs an independent prosecutor to
go after the corrupt. Government hasn't brought it. So the government wants to
restore confidence. They need to really do these and these are low hanging
fruits. These are quick. They can be done. It will restore some level of
confidence. That's the former Sri Lankan Finance Minister, Iran Wickramaratne.
He's also an opposition MP, as you might have been able to tell from his
interview there. Just to make it clear as well, we have throughout the day
approached the IMF for comment on the end of that interview there. So far, we're
still waiting to hear anything back from them. So if they do choose to tune in
to Business Matters, they're very welcome to ring in and we can pop them on the
program if and when they appear. But Yoko, in Sydney, Sri Lanka far from alone
in being under pressure and really kind of sort of worryingly familiar sets of
circumstances that are causing a number of these economies to be under pressure.
Very much so. I mean, I've heard about Sri Lanka for some time and now it's
getting really, really bad. I don't see any other way, though, to get out of
this economic downturn. And since the economy and the structural reform really
hasn't gone that well anyway, so all they need is the IMF aid. And if the IMF
sort of demands or insists on this thing, there's no other way that they can
recover the economy. And economy is such a big deal anyway. So in a way, I think
we are, I mean, Japan is a little bit lucky because we have a little bit of an
issue with a tax increase and stuff, but that's much more related to the defense
rather than the economy per se. And the inflation is going on and economic
restructuring hasn't gone that well, but we are not, you know, we are surviving
in a way and we are not in such a bad shape. Diane Brady in New York, one of the
great debates, isn't it? Debt relief, how we deal with it, how we do it, how we
manage debts going forwards of a number of these countries put under pressure by
a number of kind of completely, you know, almost unforeseen sets of
circumstances from the pandemic to natural disasters, etc. Very much. And the
IMF is not a charity. We often forget that, that, you know, the conditions they
attach to these loans. I know that we we've criticized them as being too harsh.
You know, we saw these sorts of protests in Greece, you know, a decade ago, and
I'm sure we'll see more of them. And the real issue here is they cannot be
enabling policies that got Sri Lanka and other countries into this position. At
the same time, there's no question that the people who bear the consequences
tend to be those who did not cause the problems in the first place. So your
heart really goes out to what, in essence, is lower income folks. How do you
think we kind of better solve that puzzle, Diane? Because that is the puzzle,
isn't it? You know, exactly as, you know, Iran, Wick Ramaratne was saying there,
he was agreeing exactly with you. But it's easier said than done, isn't it?
Because these people, that they are on the street, they are under enormous
pressures already. I mean, these are doctors walking out, these are not... Yeah,
well, there's debt, there's also, there's debt, you know, obviously, there's
debt relief, there's debt forgiveness. We've seen a huge role of China in Sri
Lanka, because of course, China is asserting itself in the region, and that has
been a major player. So it has offered debt service relief. I think we're going
to see more politicisation of loans, especially as we see more of this almost
Cold War-like mentality of who's an ally and who is not. So I think that's one
solution. Do you think the IMF is going to become more politicised? I mean, we
saw the famous case was the famous case was obviously Argentina, which has been
very politicised ever since. Do you see the IMF, which exactly as you say, it's
A, not a charity, but B, you know, it's a multinational body, it's a sort of a
political body, it seems to be being politicised, being blamed in a lot more of
these cases now, it's kind of an easy place to point the finger. I think it is
an easy target. You've heard sort of similar rhetoric coming out of Pakistan,
which is also looking for some IMF relief. So I think inevitably, it will be a
political target to the extent that we can. They try to keep the conditions, I
think, pretty standardised for everyone. And where I think a lot of the relief
comes in is when large countries, large players in the world come in and really
exert their influence. But in this particular case, these are issues we've heard
for many, many years. And the conditions that got Sri Lanka into this position
are ones that are domestically oriented. And I think the IMF has tried hard to
address the core cause of these different crises, which are very different
country to country. Yeah, absolutely. Yoko, Diane making the important point
there. You know, Sri Lanka has created this itself through unfortunately, I
think everybody can agree now, certainly the previous president stepped down on
the basis that there had been a lot of botched decisions, to put it politely. A
lot of big Japanese multinationals have been people who've been investing there
and the Japanese government had been investing there. Something we talked to
Iran, Wickram Ratner about in that piece there was the Japanese government had
been lending money for big infrastructure projects and things like that. Those
have been cancelled. I imagine that really damages confidence in terms of the
government going back there again and making similar kinds of investments again
when that's just cut off. How does the country rebuild its reputation? How does
it rebuild that confidence again? I think it's very, very difficult. And
particularly so when the things are not going that well for other governments as
well. So whenever they try to set up the investment for the infrastructure and
things like that, they are taking some money off from other things. And if that
because of this protest and all these politicizing, it gets cancelled, I mean,
we suffer. I mean, the government suffers a lot and say, never again. We did it.
We tried to help, but it didn't work. So I'm not going to do it ever again. And
that's what I mean, the companies, once they lose the reputation, they're in
really bad shape. But the government is even more so because they are looking
for the investment. Diane, that's the other very sharp side of this particularly
double-edged sword, isn't it? In terms of digging yourself out of this hole,
one, putting in place things like raising taxes to try and boost up the tax
base, but two, trying to regain confidence to get foreign dollars back into your
economy again. I think that's the big question is you do have to create
conditions for investor confidence. It's been fascinating with Sri Lanka to see
the battle between India and China, frankly. I think those are the two biggest
bilateral lenders to Sri Lanka. I think that is as much for political reasons as
it is for financial gains, frankly. Do you see the US moving into that space,
Diane, in the way that it has been doing in Africa a little bit around some of
these very similar issues? I think it's interesting. I think the US is keeping a
closer eye on China and what Xi Jinping is doing. I don't know about Sri Lanka
specifically. I think a lot of the attention obviously has been toward East Asia
because of the situation with Taiwan and such. But there's no question that
everyone is seeing the influence that China in particular is wielding. And I
think that's of interest. But there's been a real anti-globalization streak in
the US. Whether that reverses, you know, it's hosting APEC this year and such,
there's still a lot of business going on. But the rhetoric that you're hearing
out of Washington is not about engagement in this area. It's if anything, it's
the opposite. We say this relatively often across our programs. You know, we're
going to keep watching story X. But unfortunately, I think with a number of
these economies, there are stories that are going to keep popping back up again
because as Diane and Yoko very neatly illustrated, there aren't particularly
easy solutions. Going to move away from big economic issues though and to some
more of a corporate story now and to Diane's home territory of the United
States, because for years, diabetes sufferers have felt they're being taxed for
their condition. That's because of the spiralling cost of drugs to treat that
particular condition. Today, a major breakthrough potentially for them, and
perhaps a wider shift in US pharmaceuticals as well as the drug giant Eli Lilly
announced it will cut prices for its most commonly prescribed insulin products
that help treat diabetes by 70% and take other steps to try and make it easier
for patients to afford those drugs. The company also said that on May the 1st,
it would reduce the list price of unbranded insulin it sells to $25 a vial. When
you say no, that that is down from 80 plus dollars a vial, that is quite some
cap. Stacey Dusatzina is a professor at Vanderbilt University's Medical Center
in Nashville, Tennessee. She gave us her reaction. One of the big announcements
here is that they are going to make a vial of their insulin available starting
in May for $25. That is a real deal for somebody who is uninsured in the US and
we have about 8% of people who don't have health insurance, so that would be a
big deal. They also note that they plan to cut their prices for some of their
brand name drugs by 70%. Notably absent is what that price will be and that
price cut will happen at the end of the year, so I'm still waiting to see what
that looks like before celebrating too much. And they note that they're going to
introduce a biosimilar for a competitor product later in the year as well and
that will also be available at a slightly lower price point. I think by and
large this is a really nice set of changes and one that is responsive to some
populations being left out of key legislation that has recently passed in the
US. Right, because I was going to ask you about the why. Is that the why and the
why now from both sides? Is it purely government pressure or is this purely a
commercial decision or a bit of both meeting in the middle? I think it's
absolutely a bit of both. So I think that there has been substantial political
pressure to do something about the prices of insulin in particular and the fact
that for people on our Medicare program, older adults, they'll have access to
low-cost insulin but younger people would not. I think it's a really important
gap that they are hoping to fill. Because it's ostensibly a tax on people who've
got diabetes otherwise. That's right. And I would say the other side for the
commercial interest. It is important to note these are Eli Lilly's older
products and they do point that out. They face really stiff brand competition
and stiff biosimilar competition. So I think that while the price drop looks
pretty substantial, it probably isn't that big of a change in the amount that
they get paid for those insulin products today. So I think that this is a really
smart way for them to build some goodwill with the public and with the
administration. That's the interesting devil in the detail so to speak. That
actually not much is going to change as a result of this announcement today. I
mean I've billed it as everybody has in the way that it has been billed as sort
of a significant change. But actually in terms of the real, the actual money
that a hospital is paying or a medical centre or a family practitioner is
paying, not a heck of a lot is changing. That's right. And one of the reasons is
that in the US system we have a lot of intermediaries and health plans that are
negotiating benefits. So pharmacy benefits managers and they negotiate really
deep discounts and rebates on these products today. So in effect Lilly is
probably just passing along what they would be charging or receiving from a
health plan. Just making that price available to consumers directly. Stacey
Ducitzina, Professor at Vanderbilt University Medical Centre. And if you heard a
little bit of background noise there, she was kindly speaking to us from the
airport on her way to Washington DC for a medical conference. Diane, what did
you make of this story today? Well I think it certainly tells you something
about how much they've been overcharging. This is a drug that Eli Lilly
introduced in 1996 and it's gone up, if you look at the 2018 price, it was
essentially 11 times higher than inflation. It's gone up 680% from the time it
was launched. You can do that in the US in a way you can't do in other parts of
the world which tend to have universal healthcare where the government
negotiates and prices are capped. The US is unique that way and it is responding
to government pressure. It's responding to lawsuits. Well I was going to say,
politics not far away, Diane, because it's been something the White House has
been really pushing for, the Biden White House, isn't it? Very much so. And also
they've been facing lawsuits from the states and I think that it's an indication
they would rather lower the prices than face regulation but I think regulation
and the calls for that are going to continue and there are two rivals to Eli
Lilly that are no doubt going to have to respond to get this price, which is
essentially pretty cheap to mass produce human insulin, to get it back in line
with what's affordable for people who are dealing with diabetes. I guess, Diane,
once you get the genie out of the bottle with something like this though, people
with lots of other very common conditions, I don't know, asthma medications,
something for kind of blood thinning, why would they not be making similar
claims? Does this sort of open the flow for potentially a whole raft of this
kind of stuff? It should. I mean one of the idiosyncrasies of the US system,
first of all, when something goes generic or off patent, it's supposed to become
much cheaper. That is gamed very much so here in the US and there's also, in
addition to being able to game that system, there's no real price caps, which is
why you've seen things like the EpiPen that went up a phenomenal amount when
that company's taken over. I mean the drugs company's argument, and you know
this, is that that money then goes back into the research, doesn't it? And
that's where they really have a big boost on it. And they use the US as sort of
the place where you can raise prices because in other parts of the world you
can't. So there's all kinds of arguments for it, but at the end of the day, much
of it's not justifiable from a consumer point of view and it's the end user that
suffers. Yeah, I won't ask you about Australia's circumstance, but at home in
Japan, in terms of those controls, what is the relationship between big
pharmaceutical firms and say the state health authorities? Well, the Ministry of
Health and Welfare does regulate a lot of things and that sometimes it's too
much regulation and the drug prices have gone down accordingly. And I don't
think we have that much of a problem with the diabetes per se, but when it comes
to the quality of health care and what kind of medicines are available to the
consumers in Japan, we're pretty much restricted as well, partly because it's so
highly regulated, which is good in a way, and yet you know you don't get too
many liberty or freedom to choose what you want. But, well, first of all, the
diabetes is not that high in Japan, so partly because we're not that many, we
don't have that many obese people and the drug prices have been kept quite low
and it's going down. But at the same time, we don't have that many generic drugs
and people tend to stay with the branded products and it's partly because, you
know, they don't want to take chances and so you really have to ask for the
generics if you go to see the doctor and ask for the prescriptions. But I think
it's changing because the health care cost in Japan is going up so quickly. And
with those demographic shifts that we've seen in Japan, a lot of pressure as
we're seeing in lots of parts of the world, isn't it? Lots more pressure on the
health services there. Interesting stuff, great stuff from Diane on that as
well. Plenty more on that story, bbc.com forward slash news and you can search
for it there. More from Diane Brady, more from Yoko Ishikura in the second half
of Business Matters. But first of all, we're going to get you up to speed with
all the very latest world news. This is the BBC World Service and here's Harriet
Gilbert to tell you about the next World Book Club. This month we're in France
to talk about a most extraordinary, daring and original novel called Pig Tales.
When it was published in 1996, it created an enormous stir. It's not a feminist
pamphlet. It's a feminist book. It is. But I'm not telling you what to think, I
hope. It's the story of a lovely young woman who submits to the sexual demands
of the director of a perfume company. Her body gradually begins to change,
growing more and more like the body of a pig. At some points, she's very animal.
At some other points, she's very human. She oscillates according to the level of
aggression against her. She's not stable. Nobody. It's a story of that, you
know. World Book Club with Marie Dariasek. Saturday at 12 GMT. You're with
Business Matters on the BBC World Service with me, Will Bain, and our guest,
Yoko Ishikura, in Sydney, Australia, Diane Brady in New York City. In the second
half of the programme, we're going to be talking tourism. Just how do you get it
right? What's the problems with over-tourism? How do you not make your
marketing, well, jingoistic about your country? And also, how do you fancy being
paid to party? Everybody in the studio fancies it. We'll tell you much more
after the very latest World News. A meeting shortly in the Indian capital,
Delhi, with the divisions over the war in Ukraine likely to dominate the agenda.
India, which holds the presidency of the G20, has taken a neutral stance on the
conflict. Over 100 girls in Iran have been admitted to hospital with symptoms of
poisoning. It follows another spate of suspected gas attacks on girls' schools.
New York City has agreed to pay more than $21,000 each to hundreds of
demonstrators who were penned in by police during racial justice protests in
2020. A lawsuit has been brought by five of the demonstrators, accusing police
of a brutal response. Romania's prime minister has introduced his latest
government advisor to the public. It's an artificial intelligence assistant,
ION, that he says is the first of its kind anywhere. ION will scan social
networks and inform the government what the Romanian public are thinking.
Ornithologists say that a rare songbird, the Dusky Tetrica, has been sighted in
Madagascar for the first time in 24 years. It's ended fears that it had become
extinct. BBC News. Welcome back to Business Matters. On the World Service, we're
going to kick off the second half talking tourism. Many countries see it as a
key way to grow their economies again, particularly post the pandemic when
people couldn't travel. One of those is Mongolia, and we've been speaking to
their tourism minister, Nomin Chimbat. And are you doing that through incentives
for airlines? Will there be sort of, I don't know, tax breaks on them or cheaper
landing spots at airports? What will that look like in terms of attracting these
international airlines? I'm looking at Visit Mongolia, your website at the
moment, absolutely extraordinary. I think a lot of people looking at it, it
would look very different to anywhere they've holidayed before. Give people a
sense of the welcome and what they could expect if they do indeed choose to come
to Mongolia on their holiday for the first time. You have business interests in
the tourist industry yourself, don't you? I wondered, how is business right now?
How is business at the moment? It's Friday evening where you are when we're
speaking to you. Good time to be going out for dinner. What would we be eating
if we were with you now? What would we be eating and drinking? But especially in
Mongolian cuisine, you'll be able to enjoy meat-based dishes, however, which
also have a strong sense of barbecue. So I'm on the next flight. You should
come. Noamin Chimbat, Culture Minister in the Mongolian government. Thank you so
much for speaking to us. Thank you very much for having me. So there you go.
There's my trip to Ulaanbaatar book. I've still not made it yet, waiting for the
BBC to find the checkbook for that one. That's a developing country and looking
at new flights and things like that. But what about a more kind of developed
tourism market? I've been chatting to Niall Gibbons this week. He's worked for
Tourism Ireland for more than 20 years, 14 years as its boss, and he's standing
down this spring. We thought that kind of scope, the things that he's seen, the
transformation would be interesting. Interesting too, because Ireland now
regularly ranks as one of the world's most visited countries. It's also its
tourism marketing, according to the World Economic Forum, regularly ranks in the
top three. Before he stands down, he had a chat with us. Well, I started with
Tourism Ireland 21 years ago. It came out of what was known as the Good Friday
Agreement, which is a pizza court between North and South, sponsored by the UK
and Irish governments. And essentially what Tourism Ireland was established to
do, was to say we were promoting the island of Ireland as one. And it's been a
great success story. It was a bumpy ride at the start because we came out just
after 9-11, which had a turbulent effect on tourism around the globe. But we've
got to a point now where, well, just as we headed into COVID, we had record
numbers coming into the island of Ireland. It accounted for 10% of total
employment. And I think where tourism makes a big difference to an economy as
well, it's not just big cities like Dublin and Belfast. It reaches into every
community around every county around the whole island. And it's been a great
plus for the peace process. So how did you go about selling it? First of all,
there's the culture. Now that can be expressed through music, dance, poetry,
literature, where Ireland does stand strong on the world stage. Landscape is
another one of those. If you haven't seen the Banshees of Inishearan, you'll
know what I mean. Go and see it. That's where landscape really comes into its
own. But above all, I think it's the people. The friendliness and warmth of the
people is what comes through time and time again. And a colleague of mine
explained it in layman's terms. You go to some other countries who are good at
hospitality, and the conversation sometimes starts with the locals when you're
getting out of the elevator. In Ireland, it starts when you get into the
elevator because it won't be just, have a good day, sir. It'll be, who are you?
Where are you from? Do you have any Irish ancestry? And there's a curiosity and
a real willingness to engage with people from abroad. And I think that's what
people find charming. In a marketing sense, how do you go about packaging that
up, that personality? Well, look, there's multiple channels. The one big thing
that's changed over my tenure has been technology has come into the game in a
strong way. Multiple means of getting to the customer in a world that's moving
fast and in a world that's become very homogenised as well. Where are the subtle
points of difference that you can get across? And an example of what we've used
is screen tourism. For example, we've seen Star Wars, Game of Thrones, a whole
host of movies and TV series now made in Ireland. And it's great to have the
characters in those episodes tell the story of their experience. How difficult
is the balance in terms of when you are branding up Ireland, not being twee and
moving with the times and it not being old fashioned and almost jingoistic, I
guess, or stereotypical? Has that been something that is a challenge over time?
I think that's a fair point. And our marketing has been reasonably contemporary,
but it's important not to get too far away from your customers, so to speak. So
we use St. Patrick's Day as a great platform. Look at how folks are celebrating
the holiday right here in New York City. Patrick's Day, it's a great day of
Irish culture and the city's a great place to be. And promotions abroad. And,
you know, in some markets, there is an element maybe of Paddy Whackery to some
extent. But remember, there is a diaspora of 70 million Irish people around the
globe that have emigrated over the last 150 years, and they all carry their own
memories and their own stories of Ireland. So you can never erase that. And I
think, you know, things move slowly over time. And the image that people in the
United Kingdom would have about Ireland might be different than what people
would have in the United States. But I think that family connection does bind a
lot of people. Half of our tourists who come all have a family connection to
Ireland. That's a very important part, not just of the business. We don't see it
as a business. It's an extension of ourselves. Because do you get any pushback,
I guess, at home now? Certainly in the times that I go to Dublin, it changes, or
in particular, Dublin changes so much. And it's much more kind of European
looking and outward looking. And it's got a kind of a swagger about a whole load
of different things it has that perhaps aren't, you know, leprechauns, painting
things green, Guinness. How do you move with what modern Ireland is looking
like, while still, of course, attracting those people who do, as you say, have
this long connection that they want to go and see, and they want all of that,
all of what they see as the traditional Irishness? Yeah, it's a really good
question. And what you will find is that there are things that will always be
associated with Ireland, both at home and abroad. The colour green has been very
spectacular for us. You've brought a wonderful green scarf in with you from the
rugby. Absolutely. I was over in Rome at the weekend watching Ireland win their
third match. Guinness is something that's ultimately connected with Ireland,
very strong brand presence. It takes 119.5 seconds to pour the perfect pint. But
the best time is kept when you don't want your watch too tight. But in terms of
the image of Ireland, I think certainly it's got a much more fresh image, much
more futuristic looking. Membership of the European Union has been very good for
Ireland. I mean, probably one of the biggest statements in the last decade was
the vote in same-sex marriage, for example. We went out with the campaign,
immediately the vote was announced saying Ireland says I do. It got huge
positive attraction around the world in relation to Ireland being open, being
progressive. And it's a very different society to which I grew up in. But that
being said, the character of the place hasn't changed a lot. If you're a
visitor, Dublin is still a very compact city. Most people will still visit the
Guinness storehouse. They'll still associate Ireland with being green. But I
think the people have changed as well in their outlook to the world. But I think
they still have a very strong embrace of people coming to visit. Another digital
element that's changed everything has been apps and particularly ones like
Airbnb and the other kind of booking sites. They come with their own pressures
as well, don't they? Ireland, certainly not unique in this way, but has a
particularly acute problem with housing at the moment, the cost of it, the
availability of it, how you get it. Airbnb and some of these other sites put a
lot of pressure on that, doesn't it? And it puts tourism, I guess, in the firing
line as a sector about how much good it's doing against those pressures of
people who have to live there every day of the week. How do you think
policymakers should go about treading that line going forward? It's a very
delicate balance because when Airbnb came on the scene 10 years ago, it was
coming out of the global financial crisis. There was a lot of capacity
available. And it really was a major factor in the significant growth of tourism
to Ireland from 2012 to 2019. What we did see around other cities in Europe,
particularly in places like Venice, Barcelona and Amsterdam, was the term over-
tourism coming about. And we didn't really suffer from that in Ireland, but
congestion became a factor, which you don't expect to get in Ireland. I think
it's a delicate balancing act now because we have the housing crisis thrown into
it. We've got a lot of people seeking international protection from Ukraine. And
I think we've been very welcoming and open to that. 70,000 refugees now call
Ireland home at the moment. And I think as Airbnb and other platforms come on
stream, it's just very important that we get the balance right between making
our cities and towns good for the local population and people who want to visit.
Because if cities don't work for the local population, they're not going to work
for the tourist. Niall Gibbons, the outgoing boss of Tourism Ireland. Pretty
good knock, I think you would agree, to 21 years in the job. So we wish him well
and thank him for popping into the BBC to come and see us. Yoko, in a country
like Japan, so distinctive, I imagine you have some of the same issues that
Niall Gibbons was talking about there in Ireland. What to lean into and what not
to lean into? When does it become stereotypical and kind of jingoistic and
getting that balance right? I think because we had so many tourists coming from
before COVID, particularly from Asia and particularly China. And I think most of
the places, typical places they have covered, so they're trying to let them go
to the different places, unique places in local areas. And I think that has
worked to some extent, even though China has been in a little bit of a tricky
situation because of COVID. And so we had to have this big certificate thing and
vaccines and so forth. And yet, I think the tourism is a big chunk of our
economy. And I think we're really expecting to build on that. And I mean, if I
compare, I took the overseas travel in April, also in July, August and November
to different places in the world. And also this time in New Zealand and Sydney.
I mean, the airports are so crowded and there are so many people. Everybody
ready to get away after COVID. Yeah, absolutely. And so, I mean, I understand
that I would like to do that. But at the same time, I'm getting a little bit
tired of travelling and standing on the line for such a long time. And I think
we still sort of, people are doing all this revenge travel thing because they
want to get out. But well, it may get settled a little bit more. I'm never sure
who that revenge is on because certainly the airline companies are on board. The
airline companies are all doing pretty well. And so, all the tourism industries,
it's one of the phrases that I think I don't quite buy into all of it. Diane, as
Niall Gibbons was saying there, it's all America's fault really, how all this
tourism marketing has been done for the last decade, really. It's aiming to try
and get Americans to come. Yes, yes. Blame America. Better than blaming Canada,
which is where I'm actually from originally. You know, it's so interesting.
We're doing this on a day when Hong Kong just started its giveaway for half a
million free plane tickets and Taiwan is trying to lure people. So, it's an
interesting divide because you've got places like Venice and Barcelona, as Niall
was saying, that are imposing new costs because of over-tourism. And then you've
got these parts of the world that are just coming out of COVID that are now
trying to lure people back. So, it's very bumpy. And I think the big factor, of
course, is China because that was fueling so much of the tourism growth pre-
pandemic. And of course, they've been under these restrictions now going on
three years. There's some new learned behaviour that has to come with that.
People have been used to not travelling there. Absolutely. The other big issue,
and because Nomin Chimbap from Mongolia kind of mentioned it at the start, we
kind of took it out of the Niall Gibbons chat. But Diane, around this issue of
people are much more aware about their environmental impact now. And that is a
big choice that people are actively making and we are seeing it in companies'
financial results. This isn't just something that people are talking about out
of thin air. How much is that going to shape this? And for countries, say, like
Mongolia, who want traditional tourist destinations right now, perhaps for your
everyday person, if they're hoping to try and make some cash out of this and
bring in some much needed foreign investment, people are making big decisions
about big, long flights like that, aren't they? I think they are. I think it's
partly the flights. I think if you look at the generational differences, Gen Z,
millennials, they want more of a, I think, an authentic experience, whether it's
been honed on Airbnb, I think the older end, you're seeing more wellness
retreats. And it's interesting as you're seeing things like psilocybin and such
open up in the US, that's actually diminishing some of these overseas markets
for that. Just explain what that is for people outside the US. I actually just
did one. It's essentially, it's magic mushrooms. It's what Aaron Rodgers has
been doing, isn't it? The Green Bay Packers quarterback. Spiritual, enlightening
experiences that you're now seeing part of the reason countries are... Diane,
forget the three bases that Yoko was doing. Tell us about your spiritual
retreat. I mean, it's 1.48 in the morning here in the UK, Diane, so we're ready
for spiritual retreats. Well, yes, yes. To be continued, to be sure. But look, I
used to cover tourism. Unlike Yoko, I personally, I love travel in all forms.
And I've been very eager to get back and I'm very excited to see more
restrictions, in all honesty, on the cruise type traffic that comes in and
doesn't add to a local economy. Right. So now Gibbons, actually, again,
something we didn't have in the interview there, a good point was he talked
about value added travelers, you know, travelers going to your non-traditional
places, people going outside of, say, Tokyo, going outside of New York. Yoko,
you're saying very true. Local economies, you know, you have to, if you're not
investing in the local economy, giving to the people of where you're at, then
you're not truly a tourist. You're just sort of passing through and, you know,
it's not the same experience for you and it's not the same value for the
destination that you're hoping or, you know, alleging that you want to see.
Yoko. Yeah, I think it's, if you're trying to change the tone or the quality of
the travel for the tourists coming in, I think you really need to think about
the new way of positioning the city or the culture in that area. And I think
that's a very good opportunity for the people in the local region to think
about, to see their own area from the new perspectives. And I mean, naturally,
we want people to spend much more money than just being there. So I think that
will add a little bit of a service and other things, the uniqueness. But at the
same time, I think it's because we tend to stereotype, have a very clear
stereotype of, okay, if we go to Japan, you go to this, this, this, you try
sushi or ramen or whatever. And that sort of gets established. But I think we
have so many different kinds of things. And in a way, we don't have enough
people to take care of all these old fashioned services. That may be a very good
opportunity to ask for volunteers to have new people to serve as, you know, for
the, to give service to the new group of tourists, per se. A final thought from
you both then to round this out, what makes good marketing? What makes you want
to go to a place? Because that's kind of what both of those two people we heard
from, Nomin Chimbat and Nga Gibbons were pitching at. Diane, what makes good
tourism or what makes cringy kind of tourism marketing? Look, I have three
children. I'm very excited by the idea of free tickets to Hong Kong. It's
expensive. It is expensive to travel. I want to take them there. I used to live
there. I would, so price is a consideration. I don't look, I'm an explorer, so I
don't worry about that. It's it's expensive to travel, especially with family.
And you want to expose your kids to the world, you know, especially frankly for
the US. What makes good marketing? Yeah, well, I travel by myself. So I really
need to know what are the kind of things that I can have, what kind of unique
experiences in the community that I can find in the place where I go. And that's
not that easy to find out unless you have friends there. If you have friends
there, you know, they get, they tell you what to do, where to go and things like
that. But if you're traveling by yourself, and the new places, which I love,
it's going to be a little bit of challenge. So I think that will be a good
opportunity to market in a different way. Surprised and disappointed that both
of you didn't think the Guinness was the big enough lure. I'll take that over
the... I used to live in Ireland. No, Guinness is for breakfast, right? Yeah,
exactly. But that probably is why Diane is where she is and where I am right
now. Yoko, I just want to squeeze in a quick headline from Japan, because
there's been some really, we haven't had you on the program in a little bit and
been some really interesting stuff around. Obviously, Mr. Kishida, under a bit
of pressure being one of the few people who's been the last of the kind of G7
leaders not to visit Ukraine. What is your sense around some of this? Yeah,
well, I think, because Japan is the chair for the G7, which is going to be held
in Hiroshima in May. So he has additional responsibility to do something about
it. And particularly, what Ukraine is one of the things, one of the major topics
at the summit. And yet, he found out that the President Biden went there by
himself without any US troops in the field. So I think that gave a lot of
pressure to Kishida. And I think it's partly because the police and you know,
the security people are so risk averse, and particularly after Abe. After the
Shinzo Abe event. Yeah, Abe assassination. They really didn't want him to take
any chances. And yet, I mean, when it comes to the sort of the reputation, this
guy is the head of this G7 coming up, and yet he has never been to Ukraine. What
kind of story? You know, what kind of position? What kind of reputation does it
give? And I think that's a big, big thing. Diane, a very quick thought just to
round that out. Polling still suggesting a quarter of Americans think, according
to Pew, that the US is giving too much money towards Ukraine. President Biden's
visit changing any sort of sentiment around that? I'm glad it's only a quarter.
I think that, you know, there's been this instinct of not engaging with the rest
of the world. But I think there's a general understanding. You know, look, war
gets a little bit old sometimes. We're in a year at this point. But there's an
understanding of the threat of Russia. And I think the more Zelensky gets out
there and Biden going, it's good to remind us that this is Europe at stake, not
just the Ukraine. Yeah, really interesting. One, again, that is going to
continue to rumble and we'll continue to look at here. We're going to round out
business matters tonight talking about a really interesting scheme in Berlin. If
you were with us on World Business Report earlier, you might have heard it and a
great piece from Leanna Byrne that you can check out on our podcast. Just search
World Business Report, wherever you get yours from. This idea in Berlin that's
trying to get 18 to 23 year olds back out to nightclubs again. They're giving
people vouchers to turn up there. Yoko, a voucher to a nightclub? Would that get
you back on the dance floor? It doesn't sound too fancy. I mean, you know, if
you want to go to the nightclub, you really don't want to get the vouchers. It's
not the free trip. It's not the free trip to Hong Kong kind of things. So I get
rather discouraged if I were Gen Z or whatever. Yeah, Dyer. What are they trying
to do there? I've been fascinated at, you know, just all these studies, even
pre-pandemic of how this generation doesn't get out as much. You know, they're
less rebellious, they're more tolerant, they're less happy. Anything that gets
people, I'll just be honest, anything that gets people out into a physical
setting to have fun. You know, I think that that is a good thing because, A,
it's the joy of being young, B, it's, you know, there's no substitute for it. We
know that FaceTime and Netflix doesn't substitute for dancing together on a
dance floor. So all hail Berlin. See more people dancing around the world.
Berlin. It's been dubbed as the party capital of Europe, packed with ultra cool
venues and some of the most famous clubs in the world that never close. Why then
is Berlin having to entice young people to come back into the city? Ah, that's
better. Berlin's Senate Department for Culture on Europe has been giving out
youth culture cards or Jugendkulturkarte for youths aged between 18 and 23. The
card is a 50 euro credit, the equivalent of $53 to use in 200 venues across the
city, including nightclubs and theatres. And the reason for this money drop is
to get a generation that were stuck at home for two years to get in the habit of
going out. Schwutz is Germany's oldest queer club and it's accepting these
cards. Marcel Weber is the club's general manager and chairperson of the club
commission in Berlin. He says that since Schwutz fully reopened in March last
year, it took a while to get back the numbers coming through the doors. The war
was beginning in Ukraine, so it was difficult to start with partying again. And
we were searching a lot of staff because we were looking for people who were
interested in partying again. And we were searching a lot of staff because we
lost a lot of them during Corona. November last year, we are fully back on the
track with the full program and also enough people who work with us. When the
clubbers came back, Marcel noticed a change to his clientele. A lot of former
customers were gone and a lot of new people were coming into Schwutz first time.
And they were a little bit insecure because it's not this regular transfer you
have between older clubbers and younger clubbers. It was missing two years. The
youth card can be missing two years, Diane, but sounds like a good scheme. So
sad. I mean, how much I've in New York, that would get you two drinks. Can I
point that out? I hope they increase the card value a little bit. I think
listeners might have thought I might have been in the club in Berlin there
because I managed to press the button here that stopped me introducing Leanna
saying we were going to Berlin there. But great scheme. And we know that that is
one of the things, you know, people have missed out. Yoko, I think you were
talking about it earlier when people have missed out so much during the
pandemic. So great to hear that that scheme's going and that we hope obviously,
you know, these things shape cities. And the reason we're talking about tourism,
the reason people travel to a lot of these places for exactly things like that
in Berlin, isn't it? Diane Brady, Yoko Ishikura, great to have you back with us
both on Business Matters. Thanks so much for both your contributions. Thanks to
you all for listening to Business Matters on the BBC World Service. And thanks
to you for listening to Business Matters on the BBC World Service.