TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-16H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on Saturday afternoon at 2.45 here on BBC Radio 4. I know of no other inquiry
of its kind in the world, i.e. one in public, with statutory powers to obtain
evidence, so with respect to certain commentators, comparisons to other
countries are unhelpful. Furthermore, I wish to emphasise there will be no
whitewash. The Greek transport minister has resigned after the country's worst
rail accident in decades. At least 36 people died when a passenger train
collided head-on with a freight service around 200 miles north of Athens. Police
searching a huge area of East Sussex for a missing baby say they've applied to
keep the child's parents in custody for another 36 hours. Constance Martin and
Mark Gordon were arrested in Brighton on Monday and are being questioned on
suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. The Justice Secretary has announced
plans to give survivors and families of those killed in major disasters like the
Manchester Arena bombing more specialised help. Dominic Raab said an independent
panel of experts would support victims from the immediate aftermath of any
incident in future until all inquiries and inquests had finished. House prices
saw their first annual fall last month since 2020, according to the mortgage
lender Nationwide. They dipped by 1.1% compared with a year ago. BBC News. In
half an hour here on Radio 4, James Gallagher will be putting your back pain
questions to an expert panel that's in Inside Health at 3.30. Now though,
Moneybox Live with Felicity Hanna. Hello. If you're over 50, then how are you
spending your day? Are you busy with the normal hustle and bustle of work? Or
are you one of the people enjoying an early retirement, time to yourself and the
pleasures of no boss or deadlines? Well, if you're in that second group, then
the Chancellor Jeremy Hunt might have plans for you. He's pretty widely expected
to announce measures to entice you back to work when he gives his budget speech
in a couple of weeks. Now this is because since 2019, there's been a sharp rise
in the number of over 50s who are not working, not self employed and not
claiming job seeking benefits. Now, for a variety of reasons, they've simply
exited the workforce. Last Saturday, Moneybox found out what specialist help was
available to help this group back to work and dozens of you emailed in with your
stories. So today on Moneybox Live, we're answering your questions about the
finances and the practicalities of returning to work after 50. There is still
time to get in touch. You can email me now on moneybox at bbc.co.uk or you can
tweet at Moneybox and I will see that. Before we take a call, let's dig into
those numbers. How many over 50s have checked out of the workforce and why?
Earlier today, I spoke to Darren Morgan. He's Director of Economic Statistics at
the Office for National Statistics. So if anyone will know it is him, here's
what he said. Economically inactive, these are people who essentially have
stopped looking for work or are unavailable for work. So essentially disengaging
with the labour market. And we've seen a sharp rise since the start of the
pandemic. They are now between 16 to 64, they're over half a million people more
inactive than when the pandemic struck. And how big a part of that are the over
50s? Oh, a large part. So of that increase of half a million, over 300,000 of it
are those aged between 50 to 64. So that's very significant. Are there any signs
that that's changing? Are any people coming back to work? There are some early
signals. I mean, I think it's still too early to draw any conclusions. But what
we've seen since perhaps the summer of 2022 is people between 50 and 64 starting
to return to the jobs market, either gaining employment or starting to look for
work. And in fact, between August and October last year, 100,000 people aged
between 50 and 64 started looking for work or gained employment compared to the
previous three months. And that's the highest we have seen since autumn 2015.
And the other interesting thing we are seeing in terms of the people, the type
of work they are gaining is that we've seen a large increase in part-time
workers in recent months. And that is exactly the type of work the older
workforce are telling us that could tempt them back. So do we know why so many
over 50s left the workforce after the pandemic? Yeah, so we actually run a
couple of surveys in February and August last year, specifically looking at the
reasons why these people over 50 have tended to stop working and what might
tempt them back. And actually, there were quite a lot of interrelated factors,
such as ill health, caring for others, concerns about catching COVID, and
because they had financial security. Now, a lot of them could have retired early
for some of those reasons. But what we have seen as people have flowed back into
the jobs market in most recent months in the 50s is those people who are retired
are coming back into the workforce. So the main reason now why people are
remaining to be inactive is ill health. And we are close to record levels of
people unable to work because of their ill health. Do we know why we're seeing
people returning to work who'd previously left the workforce? Well we asked them
again, well, what could tempt them back? And I think there's two main reasons
again, what they told us could do that. The first one was actually flexible
working. They said that if they were going to come back and join the jobs
market, they really wanted to be able to be flexible about the pattern that they
have. And that meant working at home, part time, and so on. So obviously
employers, I think, are alive to that and started offering those opportunities.
And the second one, which is really interesting, is that the second time we
asked them in August 2022, was that money became a motivation. And that didn't
really feature when we asked them in February. And I think you can draw a line
to the cost of living challenges there, where people perhaps felt financially
secure when they first exited the jobs market, perhaps less so more recently.
And as the population ages generally, keeping this demographic in work is going
to be really even more important. You're absolutely right, Felicity. We're
coming to the tail end of the baby boomer generation, reaching 65 in the next
few years. So this is going to continue to be a really important issue. And we
estimate that 700,000 more people are going to be aged between 60 to 64 between
2019 and 2026. And there's still a strong demand from employers for workers. So
obviously, addressing this issue is going to be important for years to come.
Well, that was Darren Morgan from the Office for National Statistics. And
listening to him are today's experts. I'm joined in the studio by Kim Chaplin,
who's a specialist advisor for work at the Centre for Ageing Better, and also
Adrian Adair, Chief Operating Officer at Mawson Group, which is a large
multinational recruitment agency. Thank you both for joining us. Kim, one thing
to make really clear at the beginning of this is that most over 50s, before
they're retired, they are still in work. Yeah, I mean, before COVID, we saw more
people in this age group in the labour market and active than ever before. And a
lot of those people were women, actually. So we were seeing an upward incline of
what we call activity in the labour market. And COVID really gave us a cliff
edge. Individuals stopped working. And when we saw the return to work, people
over 50 were more likely than any other age group not to return. So we've got
this step change that we would like to reverse. And it must be reversible
because we were achieving it prior to COVID. Adrian, Darren was pretty clear
that what a lot of the over 50s want is flexibility. They want the chance to
work convenient hours, so they want to work from home. Are employers responding
to that? Yeah, definitely. I think, obviously, the pandemic was a great example
where flexibility, a lot of industries that never work from home, you know,
managed to work from home and get set up. So I think that flexibility is there.
I think, for me, actually, one of the big sort of areas that a lot of people are
looking to come back into the workforce who have retired or, you know, they're
looking for legacy projects, whether that be the actual project that they're
working on or the people that they're working with. And I think sometimes that
is difficult to do remotely and something that employers are looking for is that
mentorship programme and working with some of those junior people. So there's a
real blend out there, though. OK, Kim, I want to read you an email we've had
from somebody who hasn't given their name. They say, I want to work, but long
COVID means I can't do a full eight hour day. I want part time, half day work,
but no jobs are available. Also, I find this really interesting. They say my
confidence is low, especially when job descriptions with phrases like fast paced
have put me off. Phrases, language and job descriptions can be really key here,
can't it? Well, there's a couple of well, there's more than a couple of things
in that email. I mean, first of all, let's talk about ageism. There's no doubt,
actually, that ageism plays a huge part in how the labour market works for this
group of people. And it doesn't work as well for the over 50s as it works for
younger people. And we see two factors there. We see institutional racism. We
see, you know, organisations maybe following myths about what older workers can
do and can't do. But we also see individuals rationalising their position and
sitting into a position of being ageist themselves about what they can do. And
what is brilliant about the labour market as it stands at the moment is that
employers are waking up to the skill shortages and the fact that actually older
workers are the workers. There are nobody else out there that's going to do this
job. So we are seeing changes in attitude. We launched an age-friendly pledge at
the end of last year to encourage employers to think differently about this age
group and actually to take action in key areas that make a difference for older
workers. And in particular, the two areas that we want to see change, which
relate to this, are flexibility, as Edwin's already said. Flexibility is the key
change to people thinking about coming back to work. That's what will encourage
them. And also health support. And as an outcome of that, what we expect to see
is more part-time work. And I suppose that benefits everybody, doesn't it?
Adrian, really, really briefly, older workers, they have more experience. Does
that mean that they're more expensive for employers? Not necessarily. I think,
again, back to the sort of legacy projects or, you know, there's a whole debate
about purpose over pay there, isn't there? But I think if there is a purpose,
we'll definitely look at flexibility in the wage structure. Again, but where
there's key demand for certain skill sets, no matter how old you are, that
obviously drives rates up as well. So, you know, dependent on what they're
looking to do. Let's take a call. Jane is on the line from Surrey. Jane, good
afternoon. Hello. Thank you very much for joining us. Now, my grandmother always
told me it was very rude to ask somebody's age, but for a programme like this, I
sort of need to. Can I ask how old you are? Yes, I'm 65. And are you what the
statisticians would refer to as economically inactive? I think I might be
defined as being that, but that's a term that I really hate. And I think that's,
you know, just an absolute bugbear to be told when you're 65 that you're
inactive, especially if you're a busy person, as so many of us are. OK, are you
a busy person? Tell me the kinds of things that you're doing. Lots of people
tell me I'm busy. Yes, yes. Well, I think one thing that a lot of my friends are
doing, the people of my age, and I certainly do, is look after our grandchildren
so that our own kids can go back to work after they've had their maternity
leave. So although, you know, we're called economically inactive, we're actually
supporting the economy by doing that because it would be very difficult to earn
a salary to pay for a nursery every single day of the week. And I think
grandparents do a fantastic job of offering some free childcare to help them
along, you know, one or two days a week. You're economically supportive in that
role. What about volunteering? Are you quite busy? Yes, I do a lot of
volunteering in little ways here and there. Yes. And I've gone back to I was a
primary school teacher. So I've gone back to school and have worked a bit with
some of the Afghan children who are in our area. And I do some breakfast at our
homeless night shelter that's been set up through the winter in this community.
And I have a Ukrainian lady staying in my house at the moment because of the
Ukraine situation. Yeah. And there's probably various other things as well. I
think you're busier than me and I work full time. Can I ask, can you afford not
to work, not to do paid work, rather, because obviously, you're doing a lot of
work, aren't you? But can you afford not to have a paid job? Well, yes, I mean,
I do. I have three very small pensions from my previous work. So that's
something and I do have a bit of income from savings. But yeah, no, I can and I
appreciate I'm very privileged to be able to do that because I haven't got my
state pension yet because I'm not quite old enough for that yet. Yeah. Well,
Jane, thank you so much for speaking to us. I'm going to let you get back to all
the many, many things that you're doing. Thank you so much. Jane is making a
super important point, isn't she? This is a community that we might talk about
being officially economically inactive, but that doesn't mean they're inactive
in society. Yeah. Congratulations to Jane. I'm 64 this year and I think it's
really, really important to be doing all those things that she talked about.
Yeah. The economy, particularly females in the economy, carry the burden of
care. And there's no doubt that that in terms of economic benefit to us all is
huge and it's costed. And Jane's lucky because she's got pensions as well. But a
lot of women in her position don't have because they have an erratic career.
They've dipped in and out of work because they've carried that care burden for
all of their career. So it's really important we recognise that. And there's two
ways we can recognise it. We're going to be campaigning this year in the
manifestos to see paid carers leave, including leave for grandparents to look
after their grandchildren. It's really important that's recognised. But caring
full stop, caring for older relatives is just as important. But we also want to
see more part time work and more recognition of all those facets of things that
go on as we age in terms of our life being rich. But also we can still
contribute as an employed earner in an employed situation. You make a really
good point there as well. It's not just necessarily caring for grandchildren,
but older people can have their parents still to care for. Lots going on. OK,
well, Jane doesn't have the time to work. That is one side of this. There is
another side. And Adrian, this is one to talk to you about. It's people
struggling to find employment after 50. So Emma from Leicester has 10 years of
experience working in an education support role. She's having no luck when
applying for jobs and we spoke to her earlier. I'm 52 years old, recently been
diagnosed with osteoarthritis. The job that I need is quite a niche requirement
because of not being able to stand all day or sit down all day. I currently am
in work, but would like to reduce down to three days a week in order to be able
to have a better life work balance so that I'm not in so much pain, hopefully. I
have been applying for other jobs, but seem to be hitting barriers, whether
that's due to my age or disability. I don't know. Well, Emma, thank you so much
for sharing your experience with us. Adrian, employers have a role here in
making work possible for people like Emma. Yeah, definitely. I think there's a
number of employers out there that do look to accommodate sort of everyone's
situation. I think sometimes applying for jobs, no matter who you are, is
difficult these days, isn't it? You know, the amount of forms you have to fill
in and all the different things you do. So I think sometimes it's, you know,
rejection, you know, can be a confidence thing. And I think, you know, one piece
of advice I'd say, you know, speak to an expert, speak to a recruiter that's
working with some of these organisations that can support. Kim, we were chatting
actually before we came on air, weren't we, about people potentially being
rejected for jobs just in the normal run of the mill. Some people get rejected
and that really hitting their confidence. I think the way that recruiters work
now and the way that people apply for work has really changed with the internet.
And many people in this age group will not have applied for work in the way that
work is advertised and recruited now. And so it's really important to
rationalise what's happened to you and if you can get involved in peer groups or
groups that might support you. Because as Adrian said, people put applications
in and those applications are rejected, often in a very neutral way without
human interaction. And you start to, it starts to erode your confidence and you
start to think, well, the labour market's not working for me, so why should I
try? We are seeing lots of this age group being very successful. There are
actually recruitment companies now that are specifically aimed at working with
this age group and I'll name them Restless, Working Wise and 55 Redefined work
with employers and clients that are over 50 specifically. And employers work
with them because they know that this age group are the clients that are going
to be referred to them and they understand the value of that group. So go and
find some specialist support and try and find a peer group or others to talk to.
Don't just sit on your own and work in this system. Adrian, people do have
rights not to be discriminated against at work, but I want to read you an email
from Julie who spent 35 years working in marketing. She's got in touch with us
to say, I retired soon after my 60th birthday, three and a half years ago. I
would not return to work because I was made to feel old and outdated by younger
members of my 19 strong team. She says the fact that my campaigns in the two
previous years had won national awards seemed to count for nothing. The younger
members of the team under 35 never included me in any of the social events or
trips to the pub. And when I said one day that I could knit, bake and sew, a 38
year old colleague said that I sounded like someone from the war. This is a
really subtle discrimination, isn't it? A cultural issue that drove a talented
worker out. How do employers tackle that? Yeah, I think it's difficult, isn't
it? I think I feel very lucky from a cultural perspective. We have a real
interest in demographic. We're celebrating our year's service awards on Friday.
We have someone in there over 40 years that's worked, you know, I have a number
of people in my team. And I think if organisations have the culture right, you
know, it's inclusive. We're a family business, so everyone feels welcome. I
think that's the key. And, you know, we do it naturally, but I think a lot of
organisations really need to work on the sort of communications with the
different generations. But I think there's definitely sort of, you know, we I
see it firsthand, that mentoring, as I mentioned earlier, you know, there's
nothing that goes, you can't replace life experience, can you, at the end of the
day? I think certainly a number of the junior people that I work with, they see
the value in that and a number of the organisations we work with. And again,
blending that sort of experience with new is the key. And if organisations get
that cultural piece right, you heard it earlier, some of the challenges we face
with job shortages are massive. You know, so there is a role for everyone to
play. It's about organisations getting it right so that cultural fit works. Yes,
but it can be done. This isn't employers doing anyone any favours, is it? They
need these talented, experienced workers. And I think, you know, a lot of the
organisations we work with in the traditional sectors, you know, the average
demographics 45 plus. So, you know, they have massive skill shortages. So they
are welcoming people back. And we've always sort of done that. I think it's
great to see what's happening in the likes of the rail sector at the moment.
They're really encouraging this switching of sectors and transferable skills.
And that's great to see. I think that's helping people with the confidence to
move in. So there are some great examples of organisations that are doing it out
there. Okay, well, let's take another call. May is on the line. May, good
afternoon. Good afternoon. Thank you very much for joining us. Now, I can see
that you work as a consultant. I know you've got some different barriers because
you got your qualifications overseas. But I know also you're struggling to find
work. Do you think age has been a factor in that? It's actually difficult for me
to say what the barriers are, Felicity, because you very rarely get feedback
from the employer as to why your application has been rejected. And as a
previous caller mentioned, sometimes the whole process is automated. And what
I've actually found with some applications is that it's rejected almost
immediately, which means nobody's actually physically put eyes on your CV or
actually got a gist of what your experience is. There's some method or some
criteria that you have to meet. And if it's not met, automatically you fall out
of the consideration pool. And I found it personally very frustrating because
obviously with this new government drive, the idea is to get people back into
work who actually want to retire. Whereas there seems to be people out there
like myself who have a strong drive and will and interest in working, but
they're not forced to work for themselves because that's the work that they can
get versus actually, you know, finding employment. So you've been working in a
self-employed way because that's the only way to really get paid work in your
field. That's exactly right. And I'm highly qualified. I've got two degrees and
I've got excellent experience that I've gained in South Africa and in the UK in
a sort of a niche field that's around talent management and assessment for
development and selection purposes. And basically what I've found is there is
work available on a consultancy basis. But when I've tried to apply for full-
time roles, I'm just not getting through to that interview stage. So for me, you
know, it's quite a frustrating situation where I've got that energy to work, but
you're just not getting through the system somehow. Yes. Now I know you said in
your email that you were considering retraining, starting something new. Tell me
about that. Well, my particular area of expertise lies between two fields here.
So in South Africa, a psychometrist independent is a standalone profession that
falls under the board for psychology. And in the UK, it sort of falls between
psychology and HR. So, you know, thinking practically I thought, well, perhaps I
should consider a higher level apprenticeship and retrain in the HR field and
get the additional skills that are recognizable in the UK because I thought
perhaps employees are not recognizing the overseas qualifications. Okay. So you
thought about reskilling. You're over 50 and just reskilling, retraining,
finding the qualifications that you need. May, stay with me. I want to bring the
panel in on this. Adrian, incredibly frustrating for May. She's just getting
knocked back, maybe not even seen by a human. Her CV is just being filtered out
potentially. What's your advice for her? I think I touched upon it earlier,
really. I think speak to an expert in that field if you want to get into HR,
speak to a HR specialist recruiter. They'll tell you about reskilling and
retraining. I think, you know, there's definitely a demand in that sector and
space and they'll give you some good advice, really. Kim, May's been working for
herself. I saw on the Age UK website that the number of self-employed people
aged not over 50, but over 65 has more than doubled in the last five years. Is
there a scope for this to be a good, flexible alternative for older workers? I
think it is an alternative and it probably is an alternative because of all the
reasons that May's outlined. So we do see a lot of people in that age group turn
into part-time work, in part because it gives them more control. So it gives
them the flexibility that's not around in the employed. So it's a two-edged
sword in terms of if there's work there, I would say that as May was talking, a
lot of people in the field that she's talking about are freelance. That's the
nature of that sector and it's got its pluses and minuses. So yes, we do see
that. We also see a lot of older workers doing what I call a side hustle. So
they've got a pension and they've got a hobby that they turn into something that
gives them income and that's great too because that keeps local economies going.
So I would encourage it and there's lots of support locally for people that are
thinking about turning that hobby or that thing into income generating habit.
May, thank you. May, thank you so much for your call. Really appreciate you
telling us about your experiences. I think we can squeeze in one last caller.
Robert is on the line in Suffolk. Robert, good afternoon. Good afternoon. Okay,
you're over 50. Can I ask how old? 70. 70 and you're in work? In work five days
a week. Five days a week. Okay, tell me what it is that you do. I work in
engineering, restoring pieces of equipment and stuff like that, which is a
physical demanding job. You're on your feet five days a week, eight hours a day,
but I enjoy it. That's the reason I do it. Restoring engines and things,
tinkering around with engines. A lot of people actually do that as a hobby in
retirement, don't they? This is your job. Yes, it's a little bit of a hobby job
in some ways because I also have an interest in restoring vehicles. I've done
for many years, so I'm doing a very similar job and being actually paid for and
enjoy the work. What's the phrase? Love what you do and you'll never work a day
in your life. Can I ask, Robert, if you're in your early 70s, do you need to
work? No, to be straight, I don't need to work. The wife and I are both
financially secure, in all fairness, so I don't need to work. But I enjoy
working and I think it keeps me fit as well. I'm relatively fit. I don't sit
down for long and I think that keeps me healthy as well. I think if I was to
stop, I don't know what I could do with myself, to be fair, but I enjoy what I
do. Within that, I still do a part-time job at times at weekends, doing some
driving at the odd times. I'm quite busy, but I like it. You're inspiring.
What's the secret? You're talking about doing a physically demanding job as
well, that a lot of people, as they get older, they don't necessarily want to do
that anymore. What do employers need to know to recruit and then to keep someone
like you who's so engaged? That's a difficult question. I mean, that is the
million-dollar question. I like to think I keep positive in what I do. I enjoy
what I do and it comes across that way. So I think the employer is quite happy
because I don't go around moping about the jobs, rubbish and stuff like this. I
enjoy what I do. I think if you had that attitude, you'll be okay. You'll get
on. I'm sure you will if you've got the attitude. Robert, thank you so much for
your time. Really, really appreciate it. I think we're just going to squeeze in,
Kim and Adrian, your final tip for anyone listening who wants to work, feels
they would struggle to get the right job for them. Really briefly, Kim? I think
just reflecting on that last caller, I think people and purpose is why people
carry on working. It's not just finance. And it's really important to find a job
where, especially the purpose you can align yourself with and you see a value
and that you're working with people that you really enjoy working with. Adrian,
in a sentence, your top tip? I think confidence, really. Don't be frightened to
talk to experts, whether that be in re-skilling and retraining or the expert
recruiters, because I think that will really help you. And a lot of what we've
talked about today is just having the confidence and getting yourself back out
there, really. Thank you both so much. Listen, everyone has been emailing in
their droves. Thank you so much for sharing your stories. That is unfortunately
all we've got time for today. Many thanks though to everybody who's been in
touch. And thank you to our panel. Of course, you've been hearing from Kim
Chaplin from the Centre for Ageing Better and Adrian Adair from Mawson Group.
Listen, whatever your age, Moneybox wants to hear from you. If you have a
financial issue or question, get in touch. Email moneybox at bbc.co.uk. We
really do read every message. I'm back with Moneybox at midday on Saturday.
We're going to look at the rental market and hear from young people struggling
to find somewhere to live. Until then, have a very good week. Felicity Hannah.
Moneybox Live was produced by Amber Makhmoud. In just a moment here on Radio 4,
an Inside Health special on back pain. Explore the world of arts and culture on
Front Row. The atmosphere changes. The hair starts to stand up on the back of
your neck. The biggest news and interviews. It was an absolute dream of mine to
perform on a stage. Alongside live discussions, debates and the latest reviews.
She's a series of contrasts which I thought were quite fascinating. I loathed
it. I can't recommend it enough because it's so thoroughly entertaining. Join
Samira Ahmed and me, Tom Sutcliffe, for Front Row. You are a national treasure.
Live every Monday to Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15. And you can listen to
past episodes on BBC Sounds. And there's a special Welsh edition of Front Row
this evening to mark St David's Day. It includes an interview with Dawn Bowden,
the Deputy Minister for the Arts in the Welsh Government. She'll be discussing
cultural policy in Wales. And as we heard, that's at 7.15. Now though, James
Gallagher presents another Inside Health special where he finds answers to your
questions on back pain. So the first thing is breathe in. And a breath out. Take
your hands onto the edge of a table. So it's a very unusual way to use a table.
And then just gently take your elbows forwards and put your elbows onto the
table. Go right forwards. That's it. And then rest your forehead on your arms. I
am very comfortable. Can I just go to sleep? I'll be honest, I think I look like
I've just got home from a really bad day at work and just collapsed on the
table. It is a good pose for stress. Walk back with your hands. Walk forwards
with your feet. Use your hands, breath out to move. And then just stand upright.
So what we should have is an afterglow. Well, I hope you're glowing too. I'm in
a yoga studio near Stockbridge in the depths of the Hampshire countryside
because it's time for our Inside Health special on back pain and particularly
lower back pain. We've been promising it for weeks. You've been sending in your
questions. I've got dozens of questions after doing my back in. So let's answer
as many as we can with our crew of back pain supremos. My name's Richard
Hussleby and I'm a physiotherapist working in a large community trust in the
Midlands. I'm Emma Goldfrey and I'm a health psychologist working at King's
College London. And I'm Alison Traweeler from Cornwall and I'm a yoga teacher,
yoga therapist and then I became a yoga researcher. So we have this yoga
evidence-based programme. My name is David Elliott. I'm a chiropractor working
with a multidisciplinary clinic in Essex. Well, it's a motley crew in this yoga
studio in Stockbridge. And I'll be honest, I feel like I've walked into a joke.
It's kind of like what happens when you put a physiotherapist, a psychologist, a
chiropractor and a yoga instructor? Kind of like what happens if they all walk
into a bar? I don't know what the punchline to this joke is, but I'm sure if
anyone wants to write in with it, then I'd love to hear it. Back pain is
obviously a big thing. Lots of people getting in touch, including listener
Richard. My name is Richard and I live in North Devon. I've had low back pain
for 50 years, having injured my back while playing football. I had unsuccessful
back surgery in 1992 and have had chiropractic treatment for many years, but I'm
still hopeful of finding a long lasting solution. Richard, can I start with you
just to tackle that? I mean, like how common are back problems in general and
then something lasting 50 years a bit? I mean, like, is that an extreme case or
is that something you would see? So back problems are common. 60% of the
population will experience back pain within their lifetime. And I think 50% of
the population will experience some form of back pain within the previous year.
So we see a lot of back pain in musculoskeletal services. 35% of our 35,000
referrals a year are low back pain. Crikey. And many will be in the age group 40
through 60 and will describe decades worth of back pain. So that does sound
familiar to me. Emma, it must take a toll on people. Yeah, it really does. And
unfortunately, people do have anxiety and depression and stress as a result of
having back pain. But also, unfortunately, if you have a common mental health
problem like that, you're more likely also to experience chronic pain. If
somebody's had back pain for 50 years, I mean, like if you start having back
problems, Richard, are you doomed to having it forever? Yeah, I mean, absolutely
not. After 50 years, there's going to be lots of things wrapped up in that. And
that can be unpicked. Well, hopefully by the end of today, we'll have an idea of
what does work and what helps and where people need to go. Absolutely. But
Richard, I'm interested in the anatomy of back pain. What is it? What's going on
that causes back pain? Back pain is multifactorial. It's always a combination of
your thoughts, your feelings, societal factors, and the structures at play. What
we're good at is picking up the serious and the sinister. We can exclude those
and rule those out well. But then the 95% of people that are coming in with a
variety of pain experienced in their back, we can't be so specific. And efforts
to do so generally take us down rabbit holes. What is it about our backs that
make it so vulnerable? Nature and evolution rarely gets things wrong. So to talk
about the back as being a vulnerable structure is probably more vulnerable in
the current age that we're living in. The back is a rich structure. It's got
lots of things going on. So if we're not using and engaging these evolved
postural muscles, these anti-gravity muscles that hold our joints up and animate
us, if most of the day we're sitting about in cars or in offices, these
structures are compressing, they're loading, they're fatiguing, and they're
causing pain. So when I had my back pain problems, one of the things that I was
recommended to do was to sign up to either a yoga or a Pilates course, and
Alison, perfect person to speak to, was that sound advice? I think there is a
bit of a problem that yoga has grown exponentially throughout the UK, and there
are so many yoga teachers and so many kinds of yoga, that that's not necessarily
the most helpful advice that anyone could be given. So University of York in
2011 had published papers saying yoga works for back pain. And that's great, but
actually it's then, well, where do you go? So we do have a specific programme,
hours is, but if somebody went to a class and they were doing jumping around
things, or they were sat meditating in cross-leg position for hours at a time in
a cold room, they could end up with worse back pain, or they could be asked to
do lots of strenuous poses that are overly stretchy. So that could be an issue,
yes. So don't do any old yoga class is the point. How do you find the right one
then? Because I can go onto the internet and just search yoga for back pain, and
I will have my choice of videos and online programmes to follow. Are they sound
or are they a mixed bag? Definitely a mixed bag. There will be some people who
have that as a career, and they are professionals and they can put their YouTube
videos up soundly knowing that they will be insured. But from the yoga point of
view, even me with the strongest, most robust, rigorous piece of yoga research,
not just in the UK, but perhaps internationally, I have been advised that it
wouldn't be a good thing for me to put YouTube videos out there. So that then
makes you think, well, who is doing that? So be wary of that and find a good
teacher to start with. Richard, physiotherapy, for the more serious cases,
you're going to be one of the first people the NHS turns to. So what works once
you have somebody who already has back pain? Exercise can work. Physical
therapy, massage therapy, manipulation can work. Talking therapy can work. What
we think is it's possibly more to do with the person in front of you than it
often is to do with the condition they have. What does good look like to that
individual if they've had successful manipulation, whether that's soft tissue or
joint in the past? There's an expectation that that is required, and if you
deviate too much from that, then you're not meeting that expectation. You're
likely to have a poor outcome. Can I just, while we're here, David, Richard,
just spare any confusion for me, because many people will see a physiotherapist
for back pain. Many people will choose to see a chiropractor for back pain.
What's the difference? Hopefully, not very much. Traditionally, there have been
some differences in treatment approaches, but as research continues and
education gets better and better, the Venn diagram of what we both do crosses
closer and closer. Long term, the hope is that that mimics each other. There
shouldn't be a disparity in treatment styles or expected outcomes, whether
you're seeing a physio, a chiropractor, or an osteopath even. Richard, if I was
having therapy from you and David, would we just be able to play snap or?
Hopefully. I think David articulated well that the sort of dovetailing of these
professions as the years have gone on, and I've witnessed that personally in the
last 20 years since being in physio. Well, let's hear from Rolf, who's one of
the many people that got in touch asking questions about chiropractic therapy.
Hi, my name is Rolf. In my early 30s, I developed, for no apparent reason,
severe lower back pain. I was recommended a chiropractor in Leeds who x-rayed
me, said that although he couldn't help everyone, he could help me, and so it
turned out. I should add that I once visited a self-taught, somewhat elderly
chiropractor who really made things very, very much worse. How can one be sure
that the chiropractor is properly trained, and why are backs apparently so
poorly understood? Seriously, an interesting question there from Rolf about how
do you know that you're seeing the right person and the right chiropractor?
Because it's a very big and broad discipline, isn't it? It's one that the NHS
has an interesting dynamic with, one where it largely sees it as an alternative
or complementary medicine, but at the same time, there are some guidelines where
it can be appropriate, particularly around back pain. Guide us through it,
David. The evidence for spinal manipulation is quite strong. This is not limited
to chiropractors, however. Physiotherapists and osteopaths do very similar
techniques. Chiropractic itself is not just the manipulation of the spine, but
also soft tissue techniques, so massage and the application and usage of
exercise therapy, of rehabilitative movements. To find a chiropractor that works
for you and is adequately qualified, I would suggest searching the British
Chiropractic Association, the BCA website. As a short note, I would advise that
you check that they are properly qualified, definitely not self-taught. It's not
a thing that one can self-learn, much like physiotherapy or osteopathy. I just
want to deal with now, though, a question from Fran. My name is Fran, and I'm
from Keswick, which is in the Lake District. I've had back pain since I was
about 15 due to a combination of osteoarthritis, fascia joint degeneration, and
slipped discs. It took until I was 27 for a diagnosis to be made and to receive
treatment. My question is, why does it take so long to get a diagnosis and
treatment? Who wants to take that one on? Richard? It's amazing, isn't it, the
value for that individual of getting a diagnosis. We want a diagnosis. It shines
a light in the dark. And the treatment, invariably, for her problem will have
looked much like the treatment had she not received a diagnosis, I'd guess,
exercise and eventually getting better. But that drive to get clinical certainty
has probably fueled some of her problem, has fed into the anxiety of not having
the diagnosis, and shows us what challenges we're really facing when we're
dealing with people and people's expectations and unresolved problems. Emma? I
was going to say people's expectations and people's beliefs are so important.
But some people are in serious pain. Yes, and some people, because the pain is
so intense, might need to go to a physio and get some exercises or some other
things that can help. And I think one of the issues with back pain is that you
can have a scan and you can see something on the scan, but that might have no
relation whatsoever to how much pain you have, because there are people who have
things on scans, but no pain, and people who have pain and nothing will show up
on a scan. While we're thinking about treatments, we have a question from Sarah.
Hello, this is Sarah from Oxford. My dad was urgently referred to A&E with back
pain and fitted with a brace. My questions are, what evidence is there that
braces are effective for protecting the spinal cord and reducing or preventing
back pain? And would simple advice on moving be just as useful? Thank you.
David? The research into how a brace may help to physically stabilize the spine
is pretty poor, to be quite frank. What it will mostly do is provide an
awareness around the trunk, an idea, a proprioceptive feedback of how he is
standing, sitting, hopefully preventing him getting into a posture or position
that may re-aggravate the back. Unfortunately, it really depends on what he
presented to A&E with. If there was a fracture, I doubt he'd be walking out the
door with a simple brace. However, long term, if we continue to wear such braces
or supports, it's actually been shown to prolong or worsen pain. What we end up
doing is not working or moving said painful area, and that will actually worsen
over time. Perhaps better may have been some advice over reducing some movement
over a short period of time to avoid aggravation, then engaging and gradually
building some resilience back through the spine. We've had quite a lot of other
suggestions of things that people think have worked for them. Hello, my name's
Wendy. I'm a 68-year-old retired social worker. I've had back aches since my
early 20s. I find the best form of treatment is regular Iyengar yoga and Pilates
lessons together with work at home, including morning exercises, swimming and
walking on a daily basis. I wonder if there is any evidence for the work that I
do that helps back ache. Thanks. Easy one for you. Yoga and Pilates, Alison.
Yoga for healthy lower backs has a lot of strong evidence. And when we went to
NICE guidelines in 2016, we were a stakeholder in there. The yoga evidence
showed for itself it would be cost effective and effective for back pain. Little
bit of research for Pilates as well. David, what about swimming? Absolutely.
Good non-weight bearing activity. Most importantly, it's an activity. It's
something to do. If you're comfortable swimming, do swimming. If swimming hurts
your back, don't do swimming. I think the point is that we're all trying to get
people engaged in life again, doing the things that they want to do. And there
are lots of different routes to that. But the end goal is very similar. And I
think believing that they can. Alison, shall we get an idea of what good yoga
for back pain looks like? Shall we have a little breakout session? I think we
better. Draw the kneecaps up, draw the whole of your legs, suctioning them up
into your hips. Put wingnuts on on your hips, so tap your hips. So you're doing
them up. Tailbone in and up. Tummy in and up. Breastbone forwards and up. Take
your arms down, stretch them. Smile as well. I'm concentrating on too many
things at the same time. And breathe. And then relax. This would be perhaps
going a little bit further, so we're putting our hands here. And then you're
going to just step back. So you're going to step back, take your feet back
underneath your hips, stretch through your fingers, stretch through your arms,
stretch through your armpits. Take the outer hips into the middle of the room.
And then let your head go out like a tortoise into the middle. Sorry, I'm a bad
people. That's okay. And then gently walk forwards with your feet. This
particular yoga for healthy lower backs was 30% better than usual care. It also
showed that people had 70% less time off work in the year that we analysed them.
Nine months later, people were still practising yoga twice a week and
improvements were maintained 12 months after starting the three-month yoga
course. Well, as tempting as it is to keep going with the yoga poses, we
probably should get back to answering your questions about back pain with
psychologist Emma Godfrey, chiropractor David Elliott, physiotherapist Richard
Hussleby, and of course, yoga instructor Alison Treweiler. Now listener Stuart
emailed insidehealth.bbc.co.uk with his back pain remedy, and I'll be honest,
sounds like a lot of fun. Hi, my name's Stuart from Weymouth. I've had on and
off lower back pain for most of my life. Having tried various remedies like hot
mug packs, prescription pain medication, and sleeping on the floor, I found a
couple of frames of snooker is the best remedy. Emma, what do you think? I think
that's absolutely great. Whatever works for you is what you should do. And I
think as long as it's something you enjoy, you're going to keep doing it, which
is really, really important. And it will get you active, it will get you
engaged, it will get you socially connected with other people, and that's really
what we want. Richard, it's a really interesting turnaround, isn't it? Because
if you were to go back, not actually that long ago, bed rest was often a
recommendation for back pain. That's completely U-turned. Yes, that's right.
We're moving more towards activity. So in the past, as caring souls, in the
treatment of pain, we'd want to do something that avoided that person
experiencing pain, and rest felt like a good idea. And now the idea has changed.
Pain is an output of the brain. It's a combination of a potential injury, our
hopes, our fears, our anxieties, our worries, and the social context it's in. So
it's a challenge. But that example with snooker is great for that chap. It got
him moving better. He's bending across the table. We could talk about that on a
structural level. He was moving his nerves, moving his muscles, moving his
joints, and it worked for him. For another person with potentially a really sort
of nasty, acute sciatica, that wouldn't have worked. You can't just say,
everybody do snooker. Snooker's better than yoga, or whatever. It's what's of
best value to that individual. If it's not that painful, do it. If it's a bit
painful, have a little bit of a go at it. But that's great that it worked for
him. But I think what's really coming out of this is that you have to have time.
And that's where talking therapies come in. And I think that's one of the issues
that we have in the NHS quite often, that there isn't enough time to do it.
Emma, I'm really glad you're here because I do want to chat about the connection
between back pain and our minds and the brain. Hi there, I'm Charlie and I'm
from London. When I was 21, I was debilitated by back and hip pain for about
three years. After learning about the mind-body connection and our nervous
system, I was able to heal from my pain using those techniques. Can you explain
why our mind impacts our physical health so much? Yeah, well, obviously our
beliefs, our expectations and our emotions affect everything in our body. For
example, with your beliefs, if you start to be afraid of moving and think that
moving is going to cause damage, then you're not going to move and then you're
not going to get any better. You're going to get deconditioned. In fact, you may
get worse. When we're working with people who've got chronic pain, what we're
trying to do is to really explore that with them and move away from the
struggling with the pain and trying to get rid of the pain and move towards sort
of trying to live life in a way that's fulfilling for that person. And do we
know that that works as an approach in back pain? We do know that it works
alongside, I think physiotherapy is the best bet. And actually Richard and I
have done some interesting work on that. We did a trial at King's called the
PACT trial, which was published in 2020 in the Journal of Pain. And what we
found was this combined psychologically informed physiotherapy actually helped
people to function better in the short term. And that was really, really
important. And this was a very small intervention, only three sessions, because
we wanted to do something that was similar to what people would get in the NHS.
We realised that how you talk to people and how you make that rapport and that
relationship with the patient is so, so important if you want to get any kind of
good results and really help that person. Instead of just pushing and prodding
and manipulating X, Y and Z, we're now setting some realistic goals about
getting back to functional activity that might be walking the kids to school. We
shift the focus back to the function. And hopefully over a course of several
sessions, we've moved people back to meaningful living. Funny enough, the pain
takes care of itself. Alison, does that mind body thing chime for you as a yoga
teacher? Definitely. I often get people will come along to the 12 week courses
and they'll start off saying I'm in constant pain. And then when you actually
question them and query and say, what do you mean constant? Is that in the
morning, in the lunchtime, in the evening, when you're in sleep, when you're
walking, when you're in the car? And they'll say, no, it's just here, it's just
there. So then you get them to do a yoga pose and you say, what's the pain
level? 0 to 10, before it, what's it like after? It's very empowering for them
to realise they've turned the volume of the pain down. Maybe I might say, what's
your pain at the beginning of a yoga session? What's it at the end? And again,
they've gone from a 10, a lot of pain, I'm in constant pain. They think they
are, they think they're on a 10. You make them notice they've gone down to a one
or a none and it's a goal. They suddenly, it's transformational because they
realise they can affect their pain levels. Emma, can you pay close attention to
our next question from Jane? I'd say all of you pay close attention to our next
question from Jane. Hi, my name is Jane Coggle and I live in Herefordshire. I
suffered with chronic back pain for a number of years, but a couple of years ago
I was able to consciously switch off somewhat from worrying about things out of
my control, particularly with family members, and my pain did improve
considerably. I mean, I think that stress can exacerbate pain on its own. It
probably isn't a completely causal factor, but it's certainly in the mix there.
If you're stressed, your breathing is going to change. But also, if you start
thinking about pain a lot, that's going to make you aware of the pain more and
it's going to get worse. But I think what was interesting about what Jane said
was thinking about things differently is really, really important. And I think
that's the key to actually making a difference here. Popular painkillers like
aspirin and ibuprofen, they don't actually generally relieve back pain,
unfortunately. For example, a recent study found that only one in six patients
who were treated with these non-steroidal anti-inflammatory pills like aspirin
and ibuprofen had any significant reduction in pain, and that the people who
were taking this medication were 2.5 times more likely to suffer from
gastrointestinal problems like stomach ulcers and bleeding. That's at the very
low end, Emma, isn't it? Kind of like the pain relief you get. There are much
stronger painkillers out there that some people will have. Yeah, there are
opioids and there's a huge risk with those of becoming addicted and they are not
recommended for the kind of non-specific low back pain that we've been talking
about. If you're the bus driver of your life, you've got a passenger on your
bus, which is your pain. You don't want to let that passenger take over the
driving and tell you where to go because you're still in charge of your bus and
you've got to decide where you want to go with your life. I've had a lovely time
sat here with all of you thinking about back pain and the treatment of it, but I
have this nagging question in the back of my mind about whether almost actually
the whole approach here is wrong. And we need to be thinking a lot more about
preventing people having back pain in the first place rather than treating
people afterwards. You were saying at the beginning, physio Richard, that it's
like 60% of people in modern lifestyles are a major contributing factor. So are
we just dealing with it way too late? Yes, we are. And there's some really
exciting programs underway right now, which is the good news story. But really
we're talking about societal level change and that's massive. We've talked about
the challenges of just changing some people here and people's beliefs, let alone
the therapist. If we're talking about societal level, that's a whole other
conversation, but absolutely change has to come earlier if we're going to
address this. Julie emailed InsideHealth at bbc.co.uk and she had back strain a
few years ago and she's really concerned about how does she ensure it doesn't
happen again. So David, what are the kind of things if we're thinking about
preventing back pain that can be done? So for Julie, of course it depends on how
that original irritation occurred. Unfortunately, we can't promise to prevent or
completely guard against any future back pain, but the tenants are regular
movement, some sort of strength work and some mobility work. So whether it's
Pilates, yoga, or just getting out into nature, walking, something that will
provide some resilience for her back and some enjoyment, hopefully. Crikey,
imagine that, some enjoyment out of her therapy. That's what I suggest. Does a
lot of this come down to like the idea, the concept that people have of
strengthening the core? If I have a stronger core, then I'm not going to have
back pain. Richard? We did a piece of work and it was titled the myth of core
stability because we found that we were probably over-egging the custard with
this one. And what we had the danger of doing is pulling all our eggs in one
basket and say, you know, it's all about the core. You've got to strengthen this
core and if you're going to do it, you've got to do it right. Tense this muscle
first and squeeze that muscle after. And you know, you'd be watching these rigid
movements in clinic being reenacted out with, I think I've got it right. Is this
perfect? And we realized we were creating a monster. We were becoming part of
the problem. So yes, there's a myth there, but is a good functioning set of core
muscles good for your body? Absolutely. But it can be engaged with a whole host
of stuff of which yoga is one, I'm sure. Pilates is another, swimming is
another, weightlifting is another, et cetera, et cetera. Is there anything on
the horizon that is going to transform back pain? Is there anything kind of like
exciting that people are thinking, right, this is the thing that we can kind of
like eliminate back pain as a problem or is it always going to be something that
we're going to have to live with and work through? Depends if we stay sedentary
or whether we all get moving a bit more. We need to learn how to be relaxed and
deal with stress. I think that's a huge issue in this day and age that we're all
too stressed. I think chasing a pain-free life is like chasing an ever distant
horizon. The more you want it, the further away it's going to get. And I would
agree there with Alison and I think all of our sentiments today, we just need to
be out there getting more active, sitting less, less sedentary. Yeah. And I
think accepting a bit of pain if we have it, not catastrophizing about it and
seeing it as something really serious or worrying. More programs like this,
hopefully more mediums of getting this message out to people, creating an
overall empowerment with people with back pain. Once they have that knowledge,
they can go out and hopefully feel better. I think the main message is you can
do something to help yourself. Well, thank you all for coming. I remember right
at the beginning, I said it felt like it was a joke, all of us coming into here,
a chiropractor, a physiotherapist, a psychologist and a yoga teacher. It feels
like actually it's not a joke. We're all saying the same thing. I think if
you've been 20 years ago, it would have been more of a bun fight, but it
certainly seems that we're all singing from the same hymn sheet. Well, thank you
everyone for taking part in our special on back pain today to Emma Godfrey, a
psychological researcher at King's College London, David Elliott, a
chiropractor, Richard Hossaby, a physiotherapist working in the West Midlands
and Alison Freywheeler, a yoga instructor. Thank you so much for having us all
in. I feel it would be appropriate for you to finish the session with something
nice and calm and relaxing for us. Can you do that? Yes. And this is the end of
every class on the Yoga for Healthy Lower Backs program. And it's something that
we would recommend that people would do if they had a flare up of back pain, try
to get down to the floor to do a 10 minute relaxation, but then keep moving
after they've done that. So, would you like to lie on the floor? Everyone to the
floor. You're going to start to lie down on your back and then just gently bring
your knees in towards your chest. Hold your knees with a breath out. Relax your
feet and then your ankles. Think about your lower legs. Relax your ankles. Relax
your knees. And then go into your thighs. Front thighs, the back thighs, outer
thighs, inner thighs. Relaxing the hips. Relax the sides of the legs. Inside
Health was presented by James Gallagher. The producer was Julia Ravey. After the
news, Matthew Syed will be considering how our food tastes develop and change
throughout our lives. That's next. And then at 4.30, the Media Show looks at
today's Daily Telegraph scoop on Covid. That's all coming up in the next hour.
On the other hand, if you fancy doing a spot of binge watching, here's where you
can find enough back to back call the midwife to keep you going until this time
on Sunday evening. On BBC iPlayer. Step right in. Perfect timing. The East End
is ever changing. What is this? Scooter. The border has entered the 1960s.
Barely eight years late. But the midwives of Nonata's house are forever
constant. You've a home here now and purpose and people who love you. Call the
midwife. We will be with you every step of the way. Watch on BBC.