TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is BBC Radio 4. Good morning, it's six o'clock on Wednesday 8th March.
This is Today with Michelle Hussain and Nick Robinson. The headlines this
morning, the UN Refugee Agency has accused the government of violating the
Refugee Convention introduced after the Second World War through its proposals
to tackle small boats. The Home Secretary will join us live, as will her Labour
shadow. The RMT Union has called off planned strike action at Network Rail,
raising hopes of a wider breakthrough in the long-running rail workers' dispute.
Also in today's programme… I thought it's about time. It's about time because
family carts need to stop being so private. People need to know what's going on.
How those who are part of proceedings feel about the media now being allowed to
report on family cases. Sancha Berg will report for us on the case of a woman in
Leeds who's had a baby returned to her after four older children were taken into
care. And… It's been life-changing, to be completely honest. For the side
effects I've received from it, the positive far outweigh the negative. With
weekly weight loss jabs set to be available on the NHS in England, is this what
we need in the battle against obesity? The BBC News is read by Jane Steel. The
UN Refugee Agency has expressed profound concern about the government's
legislation which would prevent almost all migrants arriving by illegal routes
from claiming asylum. It says it amounts to an asylum ban and is urging MPs and
peers to pursue what it calls more humane measures to tackle the small boat
crisis. Rishi Sunak has insisted the proposals are necessary and fair. Here's
our political correspondent Ian Watson. The Prime Minister never expected his
plans to go unchallenged. The clearest sign of that was the Home Secretary,
Suella Braverman's admission in a letter to MPs that there was more than a 50%
chance that the measures could be incompatible with the European Convention on
Human Rights. And the UK is also a signatory to the 70-year-old UN Refugee
Convention. But the UNHCR's representative to the UK, Vicky Tennant, told
Newsnight that the agency was very concerned by the new legislation. This is
effectively closing off access to asylum in the UK for people arriving
irregularly. We believe it's a clear breach of the Refugee Convention and
remember, even people with very compelling claims will simply not have the
opportunity to put these forward. The government is hopeful it can pass its
legislation by the summer, but if there are legal challenges that the Prime
Minister has declared, he's up for the fight. It's understood the match of the
day presenter Gary Lineker will be spoken to by the BBC and reminded of his
responsibilities following comments on Twitter about the government's
immigration plan. A number of Conservative MPs have expressed anger after he
criticised both the policy and the language used to introduce it. Train
companies and the government have urged the RMT to put their latest pay offer to
its members after separate strikes at Network Rail were suspended because of a
new pay offer. The surprise development has raised hopes of a breakthrough after
months of walkouts. Here's our transport correspondent Katie Austin. RMT members
working for Network Rail are expected to have a referendum on the amended offer.
It's understood no new money had been put on the table by the government, but
some changes have been made to the pay element of the proposals which were
rejected last month. As things stand, employees at 14 train companies will still
take part in strikes on the 16th, 18th and 30th of March and the 1st of April.
The Rail Delivery Group, which represents the train operating companies, called
on the RMT to meet them for urgent talks. The NHS in England has approved the
use of weekly injections that help people lose up to a tenth of their body
weight. The drug semaglutide, marked as WeGoVid, has gained popularity in the US
because it's been promoted by celebrities and social media influencers. The
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence says it will be available only
through specialist services and for a maximum of two years. Helen Knight is a
programme director of medicines evaluation at NICE. It needs to be given
alongside reduced calorie diets and increased physical activity, so it really
needs to be managed as part of these weight management specialist centres. We
also need to be mindful that this treatment does have a potential side effect,
such as nausea and vomiting. Not all patients will experience that and of course
those potential side effects need to be carefully monitored as well. A BBC
investigation has found that the number of dog attacks recorded by police in
England and Wales has risen by more than a third in the past five years. Data
obtained through Freedom of Information requests show that last year there were
nearly 22,000 cases of out-of-control dogs causing injury. In 2018 there were
just over 16,000. The UK's dog population is estimated to have risen by only 15%
in that time. A new communications system for emergency services is potentially
facing further delays, almost eight years after the project started. The
National Audit Office says it's extremely worrying that the Home Office doesn't
know when the new system will be ready. Two billion pounds have already been
spent on it, along with almost three billion keeping the current system going.
Frances Reid reports. The project has suffered repeated delays. It was
originally supposed to be ready in 2020, but that's been pushed back twice,
firstly to last year, then to 2026. Now the National Audit Office has said that
the Home Office must provide a realistic timetable after finding that there's no
longer a planned date for completion or a projected cost. The Home Office says
much of the network has already been built and it's committed to addressing
delays and providing value for money. The department says it will implement the
spending watchdog's recommendations. The owner of Twitter Elon Musk has
apologised to a sacked worker who he said in a tweet did no actual work. Hatley
Thorleifson had contacted his boss publicly on the social media site after he
was frozen out of his work accounts and the resulting exchange was widely
shared. Mr Musk apologised for misunderstanding the situation and said it was
better to talk to people than communicate via tweet. Jane, thank you very much.
Six minutes past six now. Now with all those warnings about winter and spring,
let's see how the weather is looking this morning with Chris Fawkes. Hello,
Chris. Hi, Michelle. Yes, we've got a bit of a tricky picture today, to be fair.
Got a band of rain pushing into cold air, turning to snow across parts of the
south. So let's delve into the detail. Across southern areas of England, well,
there are a number of places with several centimetres of snow across southern
England, the South Wales area as well. On the south coast, it's rain that you've
got and there is quite a sharp dividing line. Actually, temperatures are up at
around 10 or 11 degrees for western Cornwall. Now, I think what will happen this
morning is, yes, there is more snow to come across inland parts of southern
England with a few more centimetres building and the same is true across parts
of southern Wales. But eventually through the morning, there probably will be a
transition to generally more wet conditions, the snow turning back to sleet and
then probably rain for a time. Now, at the same time, we're looking at a pulse
of heavier precipitation working into Wales. And I think what that will do is it
probably will turn to snow, particularly across the hills. And because that
precipitation is going to be heavy coming down in big, wet, chunky flakes, well,
we could see some significant accumulations over the hills of Wales. I think
perhaps even 10 centimetres or more developing through the afternoon and the
evening time. And some of that snow will start to push in across the Midlands
quite widely as well towards the late afternoon and evening time, bringing a
centimetre, well, a few centimetres here. That's a possibility. So there is a
risk of seeing some transport disruption across these southern areas. Certainly
the London airports, well, the aeroplanes are going to have to take time de-
icing to keep them safe. So you might find a few delays and cancellations. Check
ahead. Now, further north for northern England, Northern Ireland and Scotland,
it's a freezing cold start to the day, the coldest night of the year, minus 14
in parts of Scotland. These areas will see some sunshine, but there will be some
snow showers around, again, bringing a risk of disruption to northern Scotland.
Eastern Scotland and north-east England will see one or two snow showers. And
wherever you are, it feels cold. And then we've got some very heavy snow on the
way Thursday and Friday that could strand vehicles. More on that later. Worrying
times, but more information from Chris throughout the programme. And of course,
if you need local information, go to the website and to BBC Local Radio as well.
Eight minutes past six now, let's take our first look at the morning papers and
also what's making the news websites. For the eye, it is a showdown over the
small boats. The Times says that Rishi Sunak is ready to battle judges. The
papers chew over the government's migration plans with mixed responses. In an
editorial, The Sun supports the new attempt to stop migrant boats, describing it
as the only game in town. The paper criticises Labour's response to the
measures, saying the opposition offered plenty of abuse, but no solutions. The
Daily Express columnist, Liam McInstry, also argues the plan must be backed. He
says the measures recognise the central factor encouraging the illicit
crossings, that anyone who reaches our shores is likely to be allowed to stay.
But the Guardian's parliamentary sketch writer, John Kray, says the latest
attempt to stop the boats looks hopelessly flawed and completely pointless. He
believes that no one will be deported for years because most cases will get held
up in the court system. On their front pages, the Telegraph and the Mail say the
BBC is under pressure to take action against Gary Lineker, after he said on
social media that ministers' rhetoric about migrants was, quote, not dissimilar
to that used by Germany in the 1930s. The Telegraph says BBC management is
furious, and the Conservative MP, Craig McKinley, tells the paper that Lineker
should be sacked. The BBC said its staff are aware of their responsibilities
relating to social media. According to the Daily Mirror, a deal to settle the
pay dispute in the NHS could be reached by tomorrow. The paper says there's
optimism that the government will come up with an offer which unions will be
happy to take back to their members. But the talks between the government and
health unions exclude most doctors, and the British Medical Association is still
planning a 72-hour walkout from Monday. The Times highlights the assessment by
US intelligence that Ukrainians and Russians opposed to President Putin's war
are the most likely people to have organised attacks on the Nord Stream gas
pipeline under the Baltic Sea last September. However, Washington thinks Kiev is
unlikely to be directly responsible. Officials say explosives were probably
planted by experienced divers who weren't working for military or intelligence
services at the time, although they might have received training in the past.
The latest revelations in The Telegraph from WhatsApp messages exchanged between
senior ministers and officials during the Covid pandemic focus on efforts to
test vaccines in the first half of 2020. Separately, a report in The Times
predicts that the most senior civil servant, the Cabinet Secretary Simon Case,
could be forced to resign when some of his WhatsApp messages are revealed in the
coronavirus public inquiry. A source told the paper Mr Case was the most
indiscreet man in government and some of his comments would be impossible to
defend. The Financial Times says EU regulators have told Elon Musk, who owns
Twitter, that he must hire more human moderators and fact-checkers to prevent
the spread of harmful material. Since buying Twitter, he's sacked more than half
its staff, including the entire trust and safety teams in some offices. The time
is now 11 minutes past six. More now on that question of who blew up the
pipelines that carry Russian gas to Germany. That's been the subject of fierce
international debate since the Nord Stream pipeline was blown up last September.
James Lander, our correspondent in Kiev, can tell us the latest diplomatic
manoeuvrings started, James, by a report that US intelligence indicates it
wasn't Moscow and it wasn't Kiev. Yeah, that's right. I mean, you know, this is
just the latest of a long series of claims and speculation that have basically
filled the vacuum of information since last September, since these explosions
that damaged the Nord Stream pipelines, because, you know, we still don't know
what happened. We still don't have any official reports. So therefore, what
we're hearing this morning from The New York Times is that US intelligence has
seen some sort of evidence suggesting that a pro-Ukrainian group was
responsible. They say there's no evidence that President Zelensky or what they
call his top lieutenants were involved or that the perpetrators were acting in
the direction of the Ukrainian government. And it's a very cautious report by
The New York Times and with the intelligence officials saying anonymously
there's much they don't know about these perpetrators or who paid for them.
They're not saying what the strength of the evidence is. They're still saying
there's, quote, enormous gaps in their knowledge. So it's a very cautious piece
of intelligence and it's a cautious piece of reporting by The New York Times. In
response to that, the Kremlin has said that it's clearly an attempt to divert
attention from claims that the US was responsible for the attacks. The White
House declined to comment in various briefings referring all questions to
investigators in Germany, Sweden and Denmark. And there's been one piece of
reaction from the Ukrainian government. An adviser to President Zelensky,
Mikhail Podolyak, has described it as an amusing conspiracy theory. Ukraine has
nothing to do with this. The risk, of course, is this, is that if there's any
truth to all of this, then it has the potential to risk division within the
Western alliance, potentially reducing popular support for Ukraine if it emerges
that some pro-Ukrainian group was responsible for this attack. James Landale,
our correspondent in Kyiv, thank you. Thirteen minutes past six now. Is it a
good thing that the NHS in England will now be able to prescribe the weight loss
drug semaglutide? Its effect only seems to last for as long as you take it,
James Gallagher is our health and science correspondent. How does it work,
James? Okay, so it's simulating the effects of a hormone in the body. So every
time that you have a meal, you don't feel as hungry afterwards, do you? And
that's because hormones are released in the intestines and they go up to the
brain and they tell your body that you're full. So semaglutide or Wagovy is
basically an artificial construct that does the same job and it sits in the body
for about a week. It's a weekly injection and it constantly sits there telling
the brain that you're full, so you eat less and then you lose weight. Okay, and
it's nice the regulator has said it could be prescribed to people, some people,
through specialist services for a two-year period. There is an early study that
suggests that at the end of whatever, however long the period is you take it,
that your appetite comes back as normal. It does and then the weight starts to
go back on. So there have been studies that show that two years after being on
the trials, then coming off the drug, then the weight goes back up. So about
two-thirds of that weight is regained over that two years after coming off the
drug. So there's very definitely been criticism already that the drug is only
being offered for a short window of time. One endocrinologist I've flickered
through my email saying it makes no clinical sense to do that. The flip side I
suppose you could argue is that there is a cost associated with this drug, it's
not a cheap drug and we don't really have the long-term data on it. It's
relatively new so we don't know what would happen if you were to prescribe this
for five or ten years. That long-term data hasn't been collected yet. So the
National Institutes of Health and Care Excellence has had to make a decision
about who gets it and when. The other issue around this is around access because
it's only available through specialist health weight loss clinics. Now they're
not available to everybody up and down the country so this isn't when you're
talking to your GP about your weight or when you're talking to a dietitian at a
community hospital. This is a specialist service and again not everyone's
getting access to that. We'll be hearing from NICE at 10 to 8 and talking about
this elsewhere in the programme too. James Gallagher, thank you. It's now a
quarter past six, just a week to go till the Chancellor holds up his red box.
The budget is coming, more business leaders are calling for action on investment
or they say the UK risks being left behind. Sean, whether he's in the studio
this morning can tell us more. Morning Nick. Whether it's those small businesses
I was talking to in Paris, in Wales last week or some of our biggest employers
that we're going to be hearing from this morning. Yesterday it was manufacturers
concerned about a lack of industrial strategy. Since then the Institute of
Directors that represents 20,000 bosses across all sectors around the UK has
said the UK should be creating a version of America's huge subsidies for
investment in green technology. The European Union has its own plans as well.
I've got Steve Hare with me now, Chief Executive of SAGE Group, that's the
Business and Accounting Software Multinational. It may well be used as your
payroll system. Listed on the FTSE 100, based in Newcastle, 11,000 staff, turns
over £2 billion a year. Morning Steve. Good morning Sean. Good morning. Do you
agree with the majority of those directors? Are we at risk of being left behind?
I think we do need a focus on growth. We do need the government to not just set
out a growth agenda but really incentivise businesses, particularly small mid-
sized businesses that we serve, to invest more and particularly invest more in
digital technology. And I think when we look at what's happening in the US and
what's happening in Europe, it is important that we keep up and we keep our
investment levels high. Are you having conversations at the moment, I don't know
whether it's with investors in SAGE Group, should you be looking elsewhere
because the incentives aren't here in the UK at the moment as we're hearing
others say? Yeah, I mean we're very proud to be a FTSE 100 company and as you
said, we're very proud of our roots in Newcastle. But we are a global business.
I mean 20% or so of our revenue is in the UK but nearly half our revenue is in
the US. And so we operate a big business in the US, we operate across the whole
of Europe. And we really are constantly encouraging the government to look at
other countries, compare ourselves to other countries and we have to set
ourselves out to be the best place in the world to set up and run a business.
And that means you've got to encourage people to invest across the board but
particularly in the digital economy and in digitising their own businesses. And
I think there's just more we can do, particularly through the tax system. I mean
tax incentives work and if we use tax incentives to incentivise businesses,
particularly small, mid-sized businesses to invest in digital technology, they
will. And as so much of your business is in the United States, I just wonder if
this Inflation Reduction Act, as it's sort of annoyingly called because it's a
bit misleading, it's about subsidies for green investment predominantly. Are you
looking at that? Are you looking to utilise that somehow? I'm just wondering how
a system like that actually does make you invest more in green technology? Yeah
I mean I think it is very effective in terms of getting people to invest in
green technology. But I think the way we're looking at it is across the board
we're trying to encourage a greater investment across the board because really
it's great if there are particular areas of the economy like the green economy
which needs more incentive. But what we actually need is everyone to participate
in the digital economy. So I think I've said in the past that in the future if
you're not in the digital economy you won't be in the economy because the world
is digitising. And in the same way that in the past governments have effectively
used capital allowances to incentivise people to invest in plant and machinery
and physical capital expenditure, it's very successful. And what we'd like to
see government doing now is just taking the same approach on digital. Treat
digital like you would plant and machinery. Get people to invest in applications
and treat it as a competitive thing. You know you've seen some big examples of
capital going to the US. You know over half the economy is small mid-sized
businesses. They're unlikely to relocate to the US but they do have choices
around investment levels. So how do we take the country on a path where it is
able to compete as much with the European Union with America? Are there key
things you think we're not doing right now that we should be changing? Yeah I
think it starts with the growth agenda. It's important that governments set out
a vision of growth because that creates the right environment. You can, as I
said, you can use tax incentives to encourage all business owners to invest more
in their infrastructure. Are your customers, sorry to interrupt there Steve, but
your customers, the payroll systems for example, do you feel like they're not
investing as much in new technology as they could be? Exactly. I think most, if
not all, small mid-sized businesses are under-invested when it comes to
digitisation. So they may have a payroll software, they may have some accounting
software, but they still do lots of things in their businesses which are more
manual, which are capable of being digitised. And what are the consequences of
that for workers around the country, for our economy? We have a shortage of not
just high skills but workers generally across the economy and I think what we
should be doing is investing so that human beings can do higher value-added
work. So technology exists today to allow you to automate more of the repetitive
tasks that take place in your business and we effectively have full employment.
We have a shortage. Every single customer I speak to talks about how difficult
it is to access skills, to access people for jobs. And so I think we have to
embrace technology, we have to embrace artificial intelligence and the things
that it can do to add value into the economy. Because if we don't, everyone else
around us is going to. So it's a competitive environment. Just finally, in an
hour's time I'm going to be talking to the Chief Executive of Legal & General,
one of the biggest investors here in the UK. Looks after a lot of people's
money. You got a message for Nigel Wilson at all? Actually I know Nigel well, he
is one of our investors and I think the message really is one of the other
things that the UK needs is more growth capital because as you're scaling your
business we need more and more investors who are there to support growth and I
know Nigel and Legal & General is one of those. We'll see what Nigel has to say.
Thank you Steve. Steve Hare there who's Chief Executive of another FTSE 100
company, Sage Group. Let's check in with Zoe Gillespie, Investment Manager at
RBC Brewing Dolphin. Morning Zoe. Morning Sean. Morning. Stock markets in the US
down between 1.5% and 2% last night after these comments from the Chair of the
Federal Reserve there, the equivalent of the Bank of England. What's he said?
Yes, we saw markets sell off actually quite heavily yesterday and the seams
continued through the Asian markets overnight and I think inflation dominated
the news last year and I think certainly we've started to see that economic data
coming out of the States is showing that the economy is stronger than
anticipated, inflation is not coming down. So I think Jay Powell has just
reaffirmed his commitment to try and get to the 2% target and I think he's
really kind of said that we're going to see potentially higher interest rates
for longer which the market hasn't particularly enjoyed hearing. And I wanted to
ask you about Gregg's. We got those financial results, sales up 20%, more stores
on their way. Is there anything to stop the juggernaut? No, I mean it seems to
just go from strength to strength and I think certainly their commitment to
opening new stores has kind of continued. The only thing I would say is they're
very innovative and it's whether they can keep that going. But at the moment
Gregg seems to just I think tap into the kind of cost conscious consumer just
now. It's an easy, convenient way to buy food. They cover, as I say, breakfast,
lunch, market, they're talking about potentially going maybe some 24-hour
openings. So they're potentially going to expand their offering as well. So it
seems to be that the juggernaut does just continue to grow and I think they were
talking about their level of trying to get to 3,000 stores. So there's
potentially a lot more growth to come. Zoe, thank you. Zoe Gillespie, Investment
Manager at RBC Brewing Dolphin. Let's talk to a former Vice President for
Europe, Middle East and Africa at Twitter, author as well, Bruce Daisley. Bruce,
morning to you. Morning, Sean. Bruce, these developments with Elon Musk in the
last sort of 24, 48 hours, he's now apologised, the boss of Twitter, he's now
apologised to a Twitter employee he was mocking. A Twitter employee who has a
disability and it seems Elon Musk was very much referring to that at certain
points until tweets were being deleted. The employee was wondering if he was
going to be sacked or not. HR told him then he was and now maybe not. What is
going on? Yeah, I mean, it's an incredibly rare thing that we witnessed
yesterday and Elon Musk apology, but it's evidence of the continuing chaos, I
think, that we're witnessing about his take up, his takeover of the brand. I
think the critical thing really is that clearly we know Elon Musk for a couple
of other businesses. We know him for running SpaceX. We know him for the
incredible things he's accomplished with Tesla. And the reason why these things
are probably going to have a spillover effect is that he's running Twitter in
such a chaotic way that it's going to have a reputational impact on his other
businesses. Last week, he was faced with a class law action saying that Tesla's
self-driving capacities, capabilities on the car was overstated. And I guess,
you know, if he's running one business that appears like it's chaotically
malfunctioning, it doesn't necessarily reflect well on a car business that he's
suggesting can help drive you home when you're falling asleep. So there are
going to be reputational damages from this continuing chaos he's creating, I
think. And so there's how he's treating employees directly, as he has done in
recent hours. It's also how he's treating the business overall and the cost
cutting and the job cuts. The Financial Times this morning saying that there's a
lot of people in saying the European Union has said that Twitter must hire more
staff to moderate misinformation. What could end up going on at the platform if
he cuts costs too far? Yeah, well, I think it's really interesting. Thierry
Breton, the EU's representative for that, has asked him to hire more people.
Most tech firms will tell you that right now, everything we're witnessing with
AI and the magical things that AI is accomplishing is definitely one of the
elements that can be applied to dealing with trolling, abuse and some of the
things that we're witnessing right now. So most tech firms would be frustrated
to be told to hire more people right now. But I think it represents a reflection
that right now, whatever technology Elon Musk claims to be applying doesn't
appear to be working, largely because he hasn't got the human hands to help
steady it and effectively implement it. So it is a reflection that there's a
growing concern about the malfunctions that are taking place. Twitter had a
significant outage on Monday. And the reflection is it's not really working the
way it's intended. Yeah, some technical issues as well in the last few days.
Bruce, thanks. Bruce Daisley, their former vice president at Twitter, back after
seven with one of our biggest investors. See what he's doing with his money.
Thank you very much, Sean. See you then. 27 minutes past six. Rob has the sport.
Morning, Rob. Morning, Michelle. Well, a goal from Raheem Sterling just before
halftime and a deeply controversial penalty from Kai Havertz have taken Chelsea
through to the Champions League quarterfinals. They beat Borussia Dortmund 2-0
last night at Stamford Bridge for a 2-1 aggregate result. Watch by correspondent
John Murray. The Champions League could prove to be the salvation of Graeme
Potter as the Chelsea manager. His team may be marooned in mid-table in the
Premier League, but in Europe, they won their group before the World Cup and won
through by doing what they had to do, scoring two goals in a game for the first
time in 13 matches. Raheem Sterling rode his luck after a missed kick to shoot
Chelsea in front just before halftime. And early in the second half, the big
moment, a VAR-assisted decision for a penalty for handball. It was debatable.
Chelsea's new spot kick taker Kai Havertz hit the post, but VAR intervened
again. The penalty was retaken and this time Havertz found the bottom corner. So
Dortmund, who had won every match they'd played in 2023, are out and Chelsea are
enjoying their best moment yet under their manager of only six months. Benfica,
meanwhile, beat Club Bruges 5-1 in Lisbon, 7-1 on aggregate. All the other
results from last night on the BBC Sport website. Well, a day of sharply divided
closing submissions at the Cricket Discipline Commission investigation into the
allegations by former Yorkshire player Azeem Rafiq of racism at the club.
Christopher Stoner, KC, lawyer for former England captain and key witness
Michael Vaughan, told the hearing that the England and Wales Cricket Board's
investigation into Vaughan's alleged racist comments had been woefully
inadequate, adding that the ECB had a biased position. In reply, ECB lawyer Jane
Mulcahy, KC, said it's simply not true that the body had been biased and that it
was inherently probable Vaughan had made the alleged comment to Rafiq and three
others. Vaughan has repeatedly denied the allegation. Changes to the 27-man
England squad ahead of their match against France on Saturday at Twickenham in
Rugby Union's Six Nations Championship. Vice-captain Courtney Laws is out, as
confirmed by defence coach Kevin Sinfield. Yeah, really disappointed for him.
Worked so hard to get back. Just a bit of a freak injury in the gym and, you
know, we're waiting for a full report but unfortunately he'll miss the rest of
the campaign for us. It's been a tough old season for him but he'll be back.
Meanwhile, fly-half George Ford has been excluded, with Marcus Smith replacing
him. Concern again about the health and fitness of Britain's Emma Raducanu.
She's pulled out of a charity exhibition event on the eve of the BNP Paribas
Open at Indian Wells after suffering from tonsillitis. She hopes to get on court
today before deciding whether she's fit to play in the Indian Wells first round
tomorrow. Here are the tips. Fontwell 310, number one, forever blessed.
Lingfield, four o'clock, number six, come to pass. Rob, thank you very much
indeed. There'll be points of view aplenty on Friday. Radio 4's feedback is the
programme that reflects what you, the listeners, have to say. I would like to
add my voice. Why have you changed the perfectly good format? Sharing your
comments, questions and critiques. It just sounds really patronising. For me it
was wonderful to hear something with such passion and heart on the radio. And we
hold the BBC to account on your behalf, the radio audience. Then it is in public
interest for us to report on this kind of thing. Join me, Andrea Catherwood, for
feedback starting this Friday afternoon at 4.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Salmons. The
time is now just after half past six. You're listening to Today on BBC Radio 4
with Nick Robinson, Michelle Hussain and Jane Steele with the news. The UN
Refugee Agency, the UNHCR, has described the government's new policy on migrants
arriving by boat as a clear breach of the Refugee Convention, amounting to an
asylum ban. Rishi Sunak has said plans to detain and remove asylum seekers who
cross the channel and stop them ever returning are tough but necessary and fair.
The UNHCR said it was concerned the measures would block even those with a
compelling claim. It's understood the BBC will remind Gary Lineker of his
responsibilities following comments he made on Twitter about the government's
immigration policies. The Match of the Day presenter described a statement by
the Home Secretary as beyond awful, provoking a furious response from some
Conservative MPs. Train operating companies have renewed their call for the RMT
union to put their latest pay offer to members. The union has suspended strikes
at Network Rail following a new offer, but walkouts at train companies are still
due to go ahead next week. A weekly injection which helps people lose weight has
been endorsed for use by the NHS in England. Semaglutide, which is popular with
celebrities, will be available only through specialist services for up to two
years. A BBC investigation has found the number of dog attacks in the UK
recorded by police in England and Wales has risen by a third over the past five
years. The Freedom of Information data also reveals a rise in the number of dogs
being removed from their owners by police, mainly due to the animals being
deemed out of control. A new communication system for emergency services is
potentially facing further delays, almost eight years after the project started.
£2 billion have already been spent on it. The National Audit Office said it was
extremely worrying that the Home Office didn't know when the new system would be
ready. Scottish ski resorts say they could have their busiest week of the year,
thanks to new snow. More than 10 centimetres fell on Monday and forecasters say
there could be another 20 centimetres later this week. Thank you very much
indeed, Jane. 27 minutes to seven now. The Prime Minister said he was up for a
fight when he unveiled his plans to stop the boats. Well, he's already got one.
Last night on Newsnight, the UN Refugee Agency condemned what it described as an
effective ban on asylum. This is Vicky Tennant, the UNHCR representative to the
UK. We're very concerned as the UN Refugee Agency. This is effectively closing
off access to asylum in the UK for people arriving irregularly. We believe it's
a clear breach of the Refugee Convention and remember, even people with very
compelling claims will simply not have the opportunity to put these forward.
Listening to that, Dominic Cassiani, the BBC's Home Affairs correspondent. It's
just stage one, isn't it, Dominic, of a battle that will largely take place in
the court. Well, yeah, it's going to be a very, very long and painful process,
this. Painful simply because it's pretty clear there's parliamentary nick to
this. And even if, let's just say the bill went through the Commons without
being severely amended by its opponents. By the time it gets to the Lords, it's
pretty clear from what's going on that a lot of them will be emboldened to stop
it. And then we're into a ping pong situation and then we're into the summer
potentially. And when we're into the summer, we're then going to see boat
crossings starting to rise as the weather calms down and it's easier to get
across. And then while all that's going on, we've still got no resolution of the
Rwanda case, which plod course of appeal from late April. So, yeah, there is a
lot of, there's an enormous battle ahead on both here for the Home Secretary.
But most of all, I think the really interesting and difficult question to answer
this morning is why her own lawyers have advised her that this piece of
legislation isn't compatible, isn't compatible, I beg your pardon, with the
Human Rights Act and the European Convention on Human Rights. And many MPs and
peers will think twice about backing it on that basis, because it is likely,
more likely than not at that point, to fall apart and a court challenge. How
unusual is it to put on the face of a piece of legislation that there's a less
than 50% chance this is legal? It's very unusual, Nick. It rarely happens
because ministers are in a negation to make sure that bills they put before
parliamentarians are basically sound, that they're able to kind of stand up and
not conflict with any other piece of legislation or any other law that's already
on the statute book. So to be in a situation where her lawyers are basically
advising we're not confident that this will stand up at the end of the day is
quite extraordinary. Now I need to caveat that. It doesn't mean that the bill
will not pass parliament and it doesn't mean that if it gets to the courts that
it won't survive, but it clearly shows the real concerns from lawyers. There's a
high level of risk here with this legislation. But the Home Secretary is
pressing, we've just heard from the UN agency, UN Refugee Agency, that they have
enormous concerns that this basically breaches a lot of rights that the UK is a
leader in protecting. Points will be put into the Home Secretary at Tempest.
Dominic Cassiani, thank you. So it sounds like a quite a long road ahead for the
policy, but let's turn to the politics of it with Nick Erdely, our Chief
Political Correspondent. The battle Dominic was talking about, Nick, might well
suit the government, but people do need to believe that what they are saying is
deliverable. Exactly. I mean, I think the government, quite frankly, will be
relaxed about the idea of a legal challenge that means that it is going to court
to say we have to do more on small boats. Yes, it wants to tackle this issue.
Yes, the Prime Minister says it's a personal priority for him, but they want to
be at least seen to be doing everything they can in the run up to a general
election, probably next year. That will mean they try and get this through
Parliament quickly, potentially by the autumn. It means that they will make it
clear they're up for the fight when it comes to any legal challenges. But I
think you also raise an important point. The challenges are all fine and well,
but the counter argument, the accusation the government is going to face is that
this is a gimmick and that it needs to do something more practical. And I can
tell you, speaking privately to some Conservative MPs, particularly from the old
Red Wall, they are nervous that this is window dressing, that this is something
that is being seen to be tackling the problem rather than actually doing it. And
there are still some nerves in the Conservative Party that unless you can show
you're bringing the numbers down significantly by a general election, then the
government will be punished for not sorting it out earlier. So the Home
Secretary will be with us later, as will Yvette Cooper, her Labour shadow. Does
Labour have a new answer to how to deal with this? I'm not sure it's new. I
mean, Labour would argue that the government's plan won't work and that you need
something more practical. So they're suggesting a new police unit to tackle the
smuggling gangs with officers based throughout Europe. They also want to
negotiate more of the returns agreements that I think we're going to hear a lot
about in the next few weeks. The idea that you negotiate with European countries
to send asylum seekers who have gone through those countries back. It's really
interesting, though, Michelle, every time you hear from the Home Secretary, the
Prime Minister on this, they almost goad Labour by saying, look, this is our
plan. We're trying something new. Labour don't have a plan. They want to block
this. It's quite clear that there's a big fight being set up politically that
we're likely to hear a lot more of in the run up to the general election. Nick,
thanks very much. It is now 21 minutes to seven. For years, journalists could
not report on cases, very important cases going through the family courts. Now
they can at least cover some cases in some courts. And our correspondent,
Sanchia Berg, who's followed this issue for many years, has spent several weeks
for us in one court. We're going to be hearing her report later in the programme
and she joins us in the studio. Just remind us, Sanchia, it was quite a dramatic
change to allow an experiment in which reporters like you could sit in court and
report on what you saw. Well, for decades, people have been trying to get
greater scrutiny of the family courts because it's worth remembering what
important decisions they take. It's the point where the state makes the most
dramatic interference in private family life by taking children into care, for
example, or placing them for adoption. And at the moment, we've got record
numbers of children in care and it's the family courts who put them there, but
we don't have effective scrutiny of those courts. So this is why it's so
important. And as I say, people have been trying to do it for a long time. This
is the best effort so far. What it means is that we can go into care cases
currently in Leeds, Cardiff and Carlisle. We have to apply for a special
transparency order. Once we've got that, we can report what we see in here in
court. We can obtain court documents. We can talk to parents, to families at the
heart of these cases, which we've never been able to do before. We've never been
able to talk to them about what's actually happened to them in court. Now, you
can't name them, can you? So what is it that is valuable, as it were, for people
who are not involved in the case, who don't have a stake? Well, we can name the
local authority, though in our reporting to protect the anonymity, which is
critical. So far, we've chosen by and large not to do so, except in a couple of
cases. There are other people we can name. We can name the lawyers, the judge,
the expert witnesses. The critical thing, though, I think, is that we can give a
sense of the process, how it works. And we can, as I say, hear from parents who,
when you go into these courts, the parents, they're sitting at the back of the
room. They are watching their lawyers speak for them. And we're talking about
their most private family lives. I spoke to one mother, you'll hear her story
later, who said to me that it was like being invisible, as though somebody had
thrown Harry Potter's invisibility cloak over her when she was actually in the
court, because it was as though she wasn't there. And it was her life that they
were talking about, her children. Sandra Book, thank you. We didn't be hearing
not just your report today, but a series of reports given, made possible by this
unique experiment in open justice. Thank you. Let's turn to the newspapers and
the government's new migrant policy. We were discussing a moment ago, the main
way that the Daily Telegraph and the Daily Mail are focusing their coverage of
it is through what Gary Lineker said about it yesterday. The Match of the Day
host tweeted saying, this is beyond awful and comparing what the government was
putting forward to Germany in the 1930s. BBC urged to sack Lineker after Nazi
migrant Jaibe Lineker faces BBC rebuke for likening Small Boat's plan to Nazis.
That's the way that the Mail and before that the Telegraph are putting it. It is
understood that Gary Lineker is being spoken to. On the front page of the Metro,
also of the Mirror, is the frightening phrase, Mum, I'm scared. The last words
of little Olivia Pratt, who Pratt Corbell, who was killed by a ruthless gunman,
according to the Metro, Thomas Cashman, who you may remember, shot by mistake.
Inside the Mirror, fascinating and important story, under the exclusive tag,
Nursing Pay Deal in sight. The paper reports the deal to settle NHS dispute for
most workers could be reached by tomorrow. Sources have told the paper there is
optimism that ministers can come up with a pay offer, which unions will be happy
to take back to their members. A whole host of unions have been involved in the
talks, which could end, says the Mirror, with a new offer over improved pay for
this year and for next. Something completely different in the Guardian, sushi
terrorism. You know, those conveyor belt restaurants which we have here, as well
as obviously they came from Japan and they're very, very popular there. Well,
they've basically been brought to a standstill because of a viral video that
appeared showing a teenager licking the open top of a communal soy sauce bottle
and rubbing saliva on passing food at one of these conveyor belt sushi
restaurants. There was another video that showed a diner placing a cigarette
butt in a container of pickled ginger. Anyway, the Japanese are absolutely
outraged and essentially these restaurants have been brought to a standstill and
where they haven't, there's going to be lots of cameras monitoring the conveyor
belts to make sure there's nothing amiss. Do enjoy your breakfast. 16 minutes to
seven. Our main news this morning is the UN Refugee Agency has said that new
laws designed to stop migrants arriving in small boats amount to a ban on
asylum. Rishi Sunak says he's confident the government will win any legal
battle. And yesterday in Parliament was dominated by the debate on that new bill
on channel boat arrivals with some heated moments, as Susan Hume reports. The
Home Secretary came to the Commons to send a clear message. Wearing a red suit,
white earrings and bright blue shoes, Soheila Braverman unveiled her new
legislation to deter migrants from coming over the channel in small boats by
banning them from claiming asylum and aiming to remove them immediately. The
British people are famously a fair and patient people. But their sense of fair
play has been tested beyond its limits and they've seen the country taken for a
ride. Their patience has run out. The law-abiding patriotic majority have said
enough is enough. As she sat down, the Prime Minister patted her
enthusiastically on the shoulder. Labour's shadow Home Secretary Yvette Cooper
pays close attention to what the government says on these issues. The Home
Secretary has said anyone who arrives illegally will be deemed inadmissible and
either returned to the country they arrived from or a safe third country. Only
that wasn't this Home Secretary, it was the last one. And that wasn't this bill,
it was the last one, passed only a year ago, which did not work. Yvette Cooper
said the threat of being sent to Rwanda to be assessed had not deterred anyone
and crucially the government still had no agreements with other safe countries
to return asylum seekers to them. Enough is enough. We can't afford any more of
this slogans and not solutions, just government by gimmick, ramping up the
rhetoric on refugees but picking fights simply to have someone else to blame
when things go wrong. In her quietest voice, Soheila Braverman accused Yvette
Cooper of histrionics and she tried to put clear blue water between the
government and Labour. Deep down the leader of the opposition doesn't want to
stop the boats. He thinks it's bigoted to say that we've got too much illegal
migration. The Home Secretary told MPs that she was confident the new laws would
be compatible with international law on protecting refugees. The SNP's Stuart
Macdonald didn't agree. He sounded disgusted. Mr Speaker, if every country
followed her example, the whole system of refugee protection around the world
would fall to pieces. But it's not just the system of refugee protection around
the world that's going to be trashed by this bill, but the UK's reputation as a
place of sanctuary. Soheila Braverman said the SNP government should bring some
of that passion to accommodating asylum seekers because Scotland took some of
the lowest numbers in the UK. Conservatives have been pressing the Prime
Minister hard for some time to take more action over the rising numbers of
people crossing the channel. Like the Home Secretary, the party's Deputy Chair,
Lee Anderson, was keen to focus on Keir Starmer. When asked by a reporter if
foreign rapists and murderers should be deported to the country where they came
from, the lawyer of the opposition replied, it depends. Well, I say get rid. So
does the Home Secretary, can she confirm that this bill will indeed get rid of
foreign rapists and murderers? But while Conservatives broadly welcomed the
announcement, some had concerns too. Sir Edward Lee hadn't been best pleased to
read reports that an old RAF base in his Lincolnshire patch could be used
instead to hold migrants before they were deported, just when the site had been
heading for a big revamp. The home of the damn bastards, business, tourism,
heritage. Will the Home Secretary assure me that if she overrides our objections
and places migrants here, that she will work closely with me and the council to
ensure this is strictly temporary and that in no way does this upset the best
deal that has ever come to North Lincolnshire? The Home Secretary said the
government was working hard on finding sustainable accommodation. She'd
mentioned earlier that her own parents had come to the UK to find security.
Other MPs referred to their backgrounds too, but came to a different view.
Labour's Khalid Mahmood said Soheila Braverman's plans clearly would not work.
So isn't the truth this? This is purely to deal with the political agenda that
she has to try and get the Red Bull seats. But she's trying to do that at the
expense of xenophobia and racism. And that is not conducive. That is not
conducive to our constituents in the country. But a Conservative, Nick Fletcher,
had looked around and come to the conclusion that... We are full. Soheila
Braverman agreed, saying the number of people arriving in the UK was putting
unsustainable pressure on public services. Susan Dean reporting there. You can
hear more from yesterday in Parliament at half past eight on Longwave and
Digital. It's now 11 minutes to seven. Around a quarter of us are within the
clinical definition of obesity, putting us at higher risk of stroke, heart
disease, type 2 diabetes, and some cancers. The implications are serious for us
as well as for demands on the NHS. And that is the background to the regulators'
decision to allow the weight loss drug semaglutide to be available on the NHS in
England. Here's one woman who was prescribed it last November. Today, I've lost
just two pounds short of three stone. My blood results are absolutely perfect
now. I'm well out of the pre-diabetic range. I had hypertension before and I'm
going to be coming off my hypertension medication. Anxiety and depression
medication has been reduced. Just general well-being is just so much better
since I've been on it. Professor Jason Halford is from the School of Psychology
at the University of Leeds and has studied obesity for 30 years. Good morning,
Professor. Good morning. What do you think of semaglutide? I think it's one of
the most powerful pharmaceutical tools to date that we've had access to. I think
the issue remains actually people living with obesity gaining access to this
treatment. The NICE guidelines are very helpful in the respect that they say
that the drug must be used in the context of specialist weight management
services. The problem is we don't have enough of those specialist weight
management services in the UK. Okay, so you would like therefore as many people
as possible to get the drug. You're in no doubt about that? No, that's
definitely not what I'm saying. This drug is very, very powerful. It needs to be
titrated up under medical supervision and it must only be used in the context of
specialist weight management services. That means in terms of diet, reducing
calorie intake by 500 calories a day and diet exercise as well and also
psychological support. Yes, I understand that. I mean that you'd like all of
those or you'd like as many people who are in this position as possible to
access those specialist services and therefore potentially get this drug. I want
to ask you though about the long-term implications of this. Clearly the woman we
just heard from there has had an incredible result in four months losing three
stone. She's on it for two years and if at the end of that she starts putting
weight back on as seems to happen with many people, what was the point of it?
Well, to a certain extent we need to understand how the body works and appetite
control works. This drug works via the GLP-1, Gucaron-like peptide one and it
signals satiety to the brain and suppresses appetite. The body will adjust to
that so you won't continue with that strong trajectory of weight loss and you'll
enter a period of weight stability and perhaps there'll be a small bit of weight
regain towards the end of the two years. What we know is when you come off the
drug at two years you see rapid weight gain because you've no longer got the
drug suppressing those appetite systems. So is it worth it? Well, the problem is
obesity is a chronic relapsing lifelong problem so you need to be managing
obesity with people living with obesity across their life course. So the drug
will only work when you give it. Right, so are you suggesting then the sensible
thing to do is to look at it like something like statins and continue to be on
it for as long as you are obese and potentially for the rest of your life? I
think we don't have the data about the long-term effects of the drug and we do
need that data about long-term. We only have data really up to two years or
there is more data coming. But if it is safe to do so for some people who cannot
lose weight and keep that weight off by other means, it might mean that.
Professor Jason Halford, thanks very much. Time now is seven minutes to seven.
Let's turn to the issue of women in sport on this International Women's Day. The
numbers playing and watching women's football has soared since millions watched
England's lionesses lift the trophy at the Euros, yet many young girls who
cheered on at home found they then couldn't emulate their heroes on the pitch at
school. Well, the government's announcing more money to try to help schools
offer equal access to sport. Will it make a difference? What is the problem?
Baroness Sue Campbell joins us, Director of Women's Football at the FA, which
has a campaign called Let Girls Play. Morning to you, Baroness Campbell. Why
can't girls play where they can't? Good morning, Nick. Well, I think for many
years there's been traditional sports that girls have played and then
traditional sports that boys have played. I think what the announcement today
has done is to make sure that girls can access all sport. For us, our players
felt after they'd won the Euros, they were determined that they wanted to leave
a legacy. I think so often, we've had major events in this country and we've
asked a question, what real legacy has it left? The players were determined to
leave a legacy, which was that no young girl would struggle to play our game in
school. But is the problem attitudes? When you talk of traditional girls' sport,
is that the problem? That people in schools think, well, girls don't play
football? Or is the problem something that can be solved with money, better
facilities, more teachers and the like? I think it's both, to be honest, Nick. I
think it is winning hearts and minds that girls should be able to access any
sport that they want to. And on International Women's Day, I think equality and
giving girls and women an opportunity to do whatever it is they dream of or
aspire to do is really important. But of course, it is also about supporting our
teachers who do a terrific job, but it's about helping them deliver effectively
and helping them to deliver football. So it is about teacher training, it is
about investment in our teaching staff. And you're right, it is about providing
the right facilities, which is a massive issue to ensure that both girls and
boys can play our national game. £600 million or so, we're told, is going to be
spent in English schools offering a minimum of two hours a week of PE. Are you
convinced that the schools that don't offer that, only two hours, not a lot, is
it, will be able to do it now? Well, it's not a lot. And actually, in many
schools, it's been declining over the years. So the fact that they're saying a
minimum of two hours is a real positive. I appreciate, got to fit it into the
timetable. But I would prefer it was much more than that. But the reality is
that giving every young person access to two hours of physical education and
sport is an investment in every young person's health. You've just had an item
before on obesity, it's about physical well-being, it's about emotional well-
being, and it's about learning those social skills you learn in teams and
playing sports. So I think it's a massive step forward. And it's the beginning
of the journey we're going to build on this and hopefully take it forward from
here. I think I'm right in saying you were a PE teacher, weren't you, Sue? In
Queen Victoria's time, yeah. But do you feel, give us a sense then, because as
you're very sweetly suggesting you're all, which you're not, give us a sense of
how far things have moved. Well, I think this is a landmark moment, one, because
our players drove it. And as I say, we're really proud of them. But this is a
real statement of intent by the government that physical education and sport
really matters. And that in itself will make a difference, plus the investment,
plus the energy we at the FA will put into driving this. We've had incredible
support from Barclays over the years, and they've been working with us to drive
this idea of equal access. So we'll be building on that to really make a
difference to every young person in this country. Baroness Campbell of the FA,
not quite as old as Queen Victoria, but thank you very much for joining us. Not
sure whether the weather is really very sporting, whether it's weather to be
outdoors, although many people will have to be, Chris. Morning. Certainly a bit
tasty this morning, Michelle. We've got some lying snow across parts of southern
Wales and southern Counts of England, several centimetres. But I think what's
going to happen this morning is we'll see a transition of the snow to sleet and
then outbreaks of rain. But there's a heavy uphulsa precipitation that's due to
come in across Wales. And I think, although at low levels that probably will
fall as rain, I think over the hills it's probably going to turn to snow and
some of that snow will probably then spread into the Midlands late afternoon
into the evening time. Now, across the hills of Wales, I would expect we'd see
probably in excess of 10 centimetres of snow. So we could see some further
significant disruption here during the late afternoon and into the evening time,
and a few centimetres of snow possible into the Midlands for this evening's rush
hour. Now, away from that band of rain, sleet and snow across southern areas of
the UK, across northern England, Northern Ireland and Scotland, it's a cold and
frosty start indeed. Temperatures have got down to minus 15 in Scotland, so the
coldest night we've seen so far this year. Apart from that, there'll be plenty
of sunshine. Snow showers packing in though across northern Scotland, bringing
further disruptive weather here. And it stays cold for most of us, although mild
in the southwest. Now, I'm going to head on into Thursday and Friday. We're
still looking at a spell of very heavy snow and strong winds, particularly
affecting hilly parts, with blizzards expected and significant disruption.
That's the latest. Thanks Chris. Next week on BBC Radio 4, a controversial
conflict is explored. It's been 20 years since America and Britain went to war
in Iraq. They were horrible days. In a new series, I examine the build-up to the
war. Although it looks as though 9-11 was the trigger, I don't think it really
was. Hearing from insiders, some who haven't spoken until now. Potential for
regime change was very high on their list of priorities. And I look at the
legacy. I'm just sad because Iraq is a great country. Shock and war. Iraq 20
years on, with me, Gordon Carrera, on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds, next Monday to
Friday afternoon at 1.45. In the next hour of this programme, decision makers at
the regulator NICE will tell us about the so-called skinny jab, semaglutide, and
why they have given the green light to NHS prescriptions.