TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Outlook. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station. Coming up on
Outlook, we're taking you to the basketball court in Castel Volturno, Italy.
It's home to thousands of migrants and under the control of criminal gangs. It's
amongst this that Massimo Antonelli created the Tam Tam basketball team. After
hours of dribbling and dunking, they were ready to compete. But a rule governing
the participation of players deemed to be foreigners threatened to stop them. So
the Tam Tams started a campaign. And when TV stations came to film the kids,
despite the real drama that was unfolding for them, they were smiling and
lively. And I think it was these joyful images that were really the winning
point. People thought, how can we take this game away from these children? Would
Tam Tam get to play? Outlook's next. BBC News. Hello, I'm Gareth Barlow. The
Mexican president has said his government is working with the United States to
secure the release of four Americans kidnapped in the northern city of
Matamoros. Andres López Obrador said the Americans had been caught up in a gun
battle between rival criminal groups in the state of Tamaulipas. They're United
States citizens that, according to the information we have, crossed the border
to shop for medication in Mexico. There was a confrontation between groups and
they were detained. The Japanese space agency has said the launch of its new
rocket has failed after the second stage engine didn't ignite. It's the latest
setback for the aged three. Japan's first new medium lift rocket for three
decades and touted as a possible competitor to the American firm SpaceX. The 57
metre tall rocket successfully blasted off from the Tanegashima spaceport, but
its speed then dropped and the space agency issued a command to destroy the
vehicle. The UN's children's agency UNICEF says the number of pregnant women and
girls who are suffering from malnutrition has soared by 25% in fragile countries
like Somalia, Ethiopia and Afghanistan. It's urged the international community
to make food security a priority. Naomi Grimley has more details. UNICEF
estimates that more than one billion women across the world are malnourished.
The agency is worried that crises around the world have made it increasingly
hard for women and girls to get the food they need. Girls in Afghanistan, for
example, are no longer getting weekly iron and folic acid supplements due to a
ban on attending high school. While in sub-Saharan Africa, many maternal
nutrition programmes have been knocked off course due to the pandemic, followed
by rising food and fuel prices. President Volodymyr Zelensky has said he's
instructed Ukraine's military commanders to find the forces to boost the defence
of the besieged city of Bakhmut. Mr Zelensky said his top generals had
unanimously advised against a withdrawal from Bakhmut, which Russian forces have
bombarded for months and now surround on three sides. President Zelensky said
one could not speak about abandoning any part of Ukraine. I told the commander-
in-chief to find the appropriate forces to help our troops in Bakhmut. There is
no part of Ukraine about which one can say that it can be abandoned. There is no
Ukrainian trench in which the resilience and heroism of our warriors would be
disregarded. The occupier kills for the very fact that we are Ukrainians. Analia
Seybakhmut has little strategic value in the Ukraine. But the city has become a
focal point for Russian commanders who've struggled to deliver any positive news
in the last few months. World News from the BBC. Turkey's President Recep Tayyip
Erdogan will face a single opponent in May's presidential election after
opposition parties agreed on a joint candidate. Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, the leader
of the secular Republican People's Party, has been elected to the presidency.
Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, the leader of the secular Republican People's Party, has
promised an opposition alliance that would govern Turkey through consensus and
consultation. The Nicaraguan authorities have closed down the country's largest
business association, COSEP. Once a supporter of the left-wing President Daniel
Ortega, COSEP is the latest organisation to be subjected to a crackdown on
opponents. The defence ministry in Peru says five soldiers drowned and another
has gone missing during a confrontation with anti-government protesters in the
city of Ilave. It said the corporals had been swept away on Sunday while trying
to cross a river to avoid hundreds of demonstrators. Officials in the US state
of Georgia have charged 23 people with domestic terrorism offences in connection
to an attack on a new police training centre during protests on Sunday. Police
in Atlanta say the suspects were part of a coordinated group. The city's police
chief, Dara Shearbaum, said the violence against police officers would not be
tolerated. When it's a legitimate protest, you have the full protection of the
Atlanta Police Department. This is not a protest, this is criminal activity. And
the charges that will be brought forth will show that. When you throw
commercial-grade fireworks, when you throw Molotov cocktails, large rocks, a
number of items at officers, your only intent is to harm. Brazil's justice
minister and the country's tax department have opened two investigations into
the former president Jair Bolsonaro. After media reports alleged he tried to
illegally import jewellery worth more than $3 million. They were given to Mr
Bolsonaro and his wife during an official trip to Saudi Arabia in 2021. Mr
Bolsonaro, who's been in the United States since just before his term ended in
December, says he's being hounded over gifts he neither wanted nor received.
Live from London, that's the latest BBC News. Hello and welcome to Outlook, your
one-stop shop for incredible and life-changing stories from across our global
village. I'm Mubi Nizar. Today, the basketball coach whose mission it is to
change the lives of young people through sports. And when he hit a major hurdle,
he threw out the rulebook. Literally. When I phoned the coach and president of a
great Italian basketball academy, he told me, thanks to Tam Tam, everyone is set
free. That's right, Tam Tam, the trailblazing basketball team. We'll come to
that in a moment. Now Massimo Antonelli lives in Castel Voltorno in Italy. It
was once a holiday spot on the Mediterranean coast. But these days, it's become
a playground for the Italian Comora mafia and Nigerian criminal gangs. Their
reputations for drug running and burning toxic waste mean the town is often
called the land of fires. Castel Voltorno is also home to an estimated 20,000
undocumented migrants. And that's the setting for this story, with Massimo
nurturing a love for basketball in the hearts of many of the children growing up
in the area. He co-founded team Tam Tam, named after the sound of the ball as it
hits the tarmac. Massimo's own love affair with basketball started when he was a
child growing up in Tuscany. My memory of this is still very vivid. My father
travelled around because he worked in the police. The whole family were
transferred to Alto Passo, a town in Tuscany near Lucca, and I played football
there. At a certain point, a young PE teacher from Lucca University asked me if
I was interested in playing basketball. He was the person who put the basketball
in my hand. And it was magic. I realised that he had introduced me to the most
beautiful sport in the world and I fell in love with the game instantly. Later
on, I moved to the city of Chieti with my father and I found a really good
coach. He explained to me that if you want to play sport well, you really have
to give it your all, you have to believe in it passionately. And to this day,
I'm totally in love with this sport. I remember a place in Chieti where we used
to train. I used to go with my good friend Enzo Carlo who played with me. He
used to pick me up on his vest about 6.15 in the morning and we used to arrive
at the court before the other people started to train so we could throw the ball
around by ourselves. When other people arrived, we told them that if they wanted
to play on the court, they'd have to beat us three against three. That was a
rule from street basketball. If you win, you stay. Otherwise, you're out. That
training ground was fundamental for me. I know you really did give it your all
because you went on to have this illustrious career. You achieved a lot. Just
give me a brief history of some of your career highs. What are you most proud of
in terms of your own basketball career? Yes, yes. Something I remember is the
emotion I felt when I was 16 years old and did tryouts for the Bologna team.
There were actually two tryouts. The first was in Rome and there were around 300
boys. And the second one was there in Bologna with around 200. There was a coach
there who worked in the top league, Nello Panatore. That gave me the chills
knowing that someone like that was watching me. Usually, you've got the ball in
your hand and you're playing, you're performing, you're competing. But when
you're playing for a purpose, to be signed by Bologna, then your emotions are
doubled. But I got through the tryouts and Bologna signed me as a player. A few
years later, I saw that coach Nello Panatore again. I was playing for the Mestre
team. He was coaching the team we were playing against, Banco di Roma. And in
this game, there were 40 seconds to go and I scored six points, the final six
points. And we were celebrating wildly afterwards and continued the celebrations
in the locker rooms. Then we heard a knock at the door. It was very discreet.
And in came this very small man. He walked in and everything went silent. And he
came towards me and there was total silence because he'd even coached the
Italian national squad. And he said, I knew I made the right choice with you. I
knew you had what it took. And that was a moment that made me extremely,
extremely proud because in those Bologna tryouts, he picked me over 500 kids.
Massimo was celebrated as a player and he could have followed the path of many
of his contemporaries and retired after his peak. But he found something he
loved as much as playing basketball, coaching and inspiring young people to live
out their hoop dreams too. So Massimo started using music in lessons as a tool
to build rhythm and resilience. And the kids loved it. Massimo believed
basketball could change lives. And for that reason, he headed to the mafia-
riddled town of Castel Voltanno. The first thing, of course, was the recruiting.
So we went to various schools. In some schools, you could go inside the classes
and talk directly to the children. And some you couldn't. And you had to wait
for the kids to get out of school. And I would just go up to them and ask them
if they were interested in playing. And after doing that, I recruited 31 kids in
total. It was a start. Massimo had a bunch of players with a bucket of
enthusiasm. Now he needed to turn them into a team. And for that, they needed a
name, Tam Tam, and also somewhere to train. There was a sports centre that had
been closed for 10 years. So I asked if it was going to be possible to reopen
it. But of course, this took time. We couldn't have access to the sports centre
for at least eight to nine months. So I asked at a school that had a gym. And we
started training there once a week. What was apparent and amazing from the get-
go was the fact that the kids were so enthusiastic that they were going to the
gym. And I was so excited to see them. The kids were so enthusiastic that they
would train for three and four hours non-stop. Often kids are tired after an
hour or an hour and a half. But these kids were so taken with this sport as if
it were infectious. It was almost as if what had happened to me had happened to
them. Right from the start, I was able to transmit to them my great passion for
basketball. And this passion immediately clicked with them. They just weren't
feeling the exertion because they were so enthusiastic about it. Some of them
walked for miles to the gym where we trained. But then around March, an official
from the school told us, unfortunately, that they needed the space so we
couldn't train there anymore. That was a very difficult moment because we
thought that Tam Tam could just fail as a project. But then one day, someone
came along and told us, well, you know, there's an old court by the sea. But it
was literally next to the sea. There was a space but no hoops. And it was
unusable, full of sand and covered in grass. But the passion and will to
continue Tam Tam was reset. And we fixed up this court with the kids. There were
some beautiful moments on that court. Often it would rain and we were right by
the sea. But even in the rain, the kids didn't stop. I remember almost with
amusement that I went to sort of seek shelter while the kids kept playing. They
were just so in love with the game that they carried on. I had feared that the
numbers may decrease with the cold, the wind, the rain. But it was exactly the
opposite. More and more kids started turning up. I know Massimo, with any sport,
and particularly any sport involving young people, there's going to be this tug
of war between the desire to do really well and the discipline to be able to
learn and to get to the point where you can do really well and you can excel.
The children that you were training, did they have particular issues in terms of
being able to get to training on time, being there consistently? All of those
things that need to be put in place. Were there particular challenges facing the
children on the team? So at the beginning, it was a real tragedy because all
these kids had never been trained to play sport. There was a lot of confusion at
the school gym. There was chaos. The balls were everywhere. They were
undisciplined. They didn't respect any cues. There were many fights,
particularly while standing in a queue or trying to stand in one. They were
always arguing and the kids that were going to the school we were training at
arrived an hour early. But those that came from other schools, seven or ten
kilometres away, they had to walk to training and were always late. The first
thing you teach the kids you're training is to arrive punctually. That's the
initial block of discipline. It's absolutely essential. But basically, I was
making a compromise, trying to look the other way and accept their lateness
because of the specific situation. But there was one moment that really stands
out in my mind. And it was when one of the kids on the team, he used to always
show up sometimes 10 minutes late, sometimes 20 minutes late, even 40 minutes.
And I would accept it. But this time he had shown up one hour and a half late.
At that point, my internal mechanism of discipline just clicked. And I said,
come here. Why are you an hour and a half late? And the kid said to me, coach, I
had to wait for three buses because the first two had someone checking the
ticket on them and I didn't have the money for a ticket. The blood in my veins
just froze. And that's when the project became really a social project. For
Massimo, Tam Tam had transcended sport. He had to make it work. At the same
time, fuelled by their total commitment to the game, the team was making real
progress. All that dribbling and dunking in the rain meant Tam Tam was becoming
a credible competitor. So Massimo went to sign up his under-14 squad for the
regional championship. When I went to register the team with the Italian
Federation of Basketball, I came face to face with an absurd regulation. Each
team could only have two foreign players, and our team were made up of almost
all foreign players. Almost all of the Italian players that started out with me
had actually left Tam Tam by this stage. So I thought, no, it can't end this
way. We had always fought to win every match. We had to do something. When you
went to register for the championship, you found out that there was this anomaly
about who was qualified and who could play in this regional competition. How did
you share that news with the children you were training and how did they
respond? It was of course a very difficult moment when I learned this. And at
first I was thinking, should I wait to tell them after we train today so as not
to demotivate them? I went to the gym for training and then of course actually I
couldn't keep it inside me and I needed to tell them immediately. At first the
kids mistook this for a racial problem and they asked why we were born here.
They didn't really understand it. They confused place of birth with the colour
of their skin. Yes, they were born here, but because Italy doesn't have
birthright citizenship, these players took on the nationality of their parents
and many of them were of African origin. So they were born in Italy but classed
as foreigners in law. In statute, each player could apply for Italian
citizenship after their 18th birthday, but that did nothing to help a bunch of
kids who desperately wanted to play basketball against other teams in the
region. In the moments where the players, the team, have this idea hanging over
them, which is essentially questioning their nationality, questioning their
rights to perceive themselves and to call themselves and to identify as
Italians, there's big question marks there. In those moments, how do you keep a
team motivated? How do you keep them training? It wasn't easy. It wasn't easy.
Someone threatened to quit. He said, if you can't play, coach, what are we going
to do? It was not at all an easy moment. Some of them threatened to give up. If
we can't play, coach, what are we doing here? The kids were right to protest and
to be disappointed. The reason to come to training is to play games. But I
believe what allowed us to prevail in this difficult situation was really the
tremendous passion that these kids were putting into the sport. I think that
when kids give you their all and they train so hard and they believe in what
they're doing and they push themselves and they make sacrifices and invest, it's
a gift really that only passion can give you. What we tried to make them
understand was also the importance of maintaining optimism high to overcome all
challenges in life always. The desire to play basketball had become a life
lesson in perseverance and a crash course in Italian law. Some of the players
went public and said they should have the right to play because they were born
in Italy. Another said he found the reasons for their barring from the
competition eye-opening and ugly. Massimo and the Tam-Tams couldn't just sit
courtside getting frustrated, so they started making some noise. So Tam-Tams
started becoming very vocal on social media and actually calling for the right
to sport for these youngsters because it seemed to us it was a tremendous
injustice, even tragic, not allowing young people to play sport. In my opinion
for young kids growing up, sport is a primary need, just like food and water.
Then this Tam-Tam campaign grabbed the attention of the media and when TV
stations came to film the kids, despite the real drama that was unfolding for
them, they were smiling and lively. And I think it was these joyful images that
were really the winning point. People thought how can we take this game away
from these children? It's impossible. And what we saw was that society around us
was also changing. People started saying no, they'd understood and were asking
for exactly what we were asking for, to change this absurd and antiquated rule.
I know at one point a Member of Parliament got in touch as well, so tell me
about that exchange. Tell me how this was picking up momentum. Yes, it was
incredible. We were receiving lots of messages, nearly a hundred a day, from
people saying, don't give up, keep fighting. And at a certain point I got a
message which said, what can I do to help you? And I replied, do as your heart
tells you. And wow, I should never have said that because I didn't realise who I
was speaking to. I was actually speaking to a Member of the Italian Parliament,
Honourable Michele Anzaldi. He became key for Tam Tam and even beyond Tam Tam
because actually he drove the debate within the Parliament and ensured that the
subject of Tam Tam wasn't seen as a sporting problem to resolve, but a law to
implement. The Tam Tams won a major battle. Their story picked up momentum and
public support, so the Basketball Federation allowed them into the regional
competition. But the rule remained about so-called foreign players, and that
meant other teams in Italy could fall foul of the same issues. The Tam Tams
fuelled a very public discussion about citizenship, sports and the right to
play. In December 2017, the government introduced new legislation, which meant
children who were not Italian or European Union citizens would be able to take
part in sports competitions as long as they'd been enrolled for at least one
year in the Italian school system. It was nicknamed the Law to Save the Tam Tam
Basketball Team. A huge achievement. Understandably, Massimo remembers in detail
how it unfolded. In December, I was driving to visit my brother in Pescara and I
found out from a phone call from a journalist. He said, Massimo, we want to
interview you. I asked why. And he said, because the Tam Tam law has been
passed. I immediately WhatsApp the team and explained that the law had been
passed. And they replied, great, we fought a great battle and we won, with lots
of emojis. Unfortunately, I did miss that initial moment of telling them in
person and seeing it on their faces. But when I got back to Castel Volturno and
I met up with them, I really tried to explain to them the significance and the
value of what had happened, that it was legendary. Yes, legendary. And the Tam
Tam's playing wasn't bad either. They made it to the regional finals. The final
was on the 16th of June, which is my birthday. Actually, I wasn't there at the
final because I was taking some other squads to a tournament in Geneva. So I was
connected from Geneva, trying to figure out what was happening in the game. The
coach driver would take pictures of the score minute by minute and send them to
me. He sent me a photo of the scoreboard and we were drawing with the other
team. Then all of a sudden, there was total silence. No more pictures, no more
news. So I thought, oh, we lost. And then I found out that we had won. This was
a very important result for Tam Tam because the team had only been training for
a few seasons, three years, and we came away with the regional title out of 64
competing teams. And imagine that, winning. You could not have a more beautiful
match. I'll never forget it for the rest of my life. There was an amazing, kind
moment before that game too. The parents of the kids playing for Tam Tam in the
final couldn't go to the game as they were too busy working. And before our
final, there was a game being played for third and fourth place. And the parents
of the players in those teams saw that there were no parents for Tam Tam's team
and that there were over 150 people who'd shown up to support the team we were
going to play against. So the parents of the players in the teams competing for
third place decided that they were going to stay and root for Tam Tam.
Naturally, the next stop would be the Nationals. But there, the cap on players
deemed to be foreigners remained. Once again, Massimo and the Tam Tams
challenged the established rules. And once again, they were successful. It's a
shift that has the potential to impact the future of the team. And it's a shift
that will be a big one for the future of the team. It's a shift that has the
potential to impact countless sports people for years to come. When I phoned the
coach and president of the Stella Azzurra, a great Italian basketball academy,
and we were discussing these changes in the regulations, he told me, thanks to
Tam Tam, everyone is set free. We're currently playing in the National
Championships. Our under 17 team have gotten through the first phase. My team
always asked to compete at a high level. They just want to keep doing it and
getting better at it. When I take them to see the top league, they love that.
They just want to compete at that high level. It strikes me that you started
your career as someone that just loved basketball and loved sport and the power
of sport. Then you went into training. And more recently, I don't know whether
you like this term or not, but through sports, you have become a kind of social
activist because you've ended up changing the way people who have origins that
are outside of Italy and don't have Italian citizenship are seen within team
sports. What are you most proud of? So actually, I feel in my heart, my core,
I'm a sportsman. I believe Tam Tam has had a really strong impact on the lives
of these kids. Before they were lazier. Yes, they walked to school, but they
needed to be challenged a bit and asked to move more. And I like this role
because I don't have a family. I don't have children. And I have a lot of time
to dedicate to them. And this has almost made them my family. I actually have
this social role where I'm often called by the families and asked to step in and
to help. For example, when the kids act up or if there are problems with school.
And so I feel I'm a sort of father to these kids, but a father that needs to be
strict at times, not always forgiving. All I'm doing is recreating the same
environment that helped me. That was the coach. And in fact, he's probably a bit
more than that. Massimo Antonelli, speaking to me from Castel Volturno in
southern Italy. Do stick with us. We're back in a moment. We have a lot of
mental health issues and a lot of substance use disorder that is very
challenging for us to take care of. If you can imagine a Winnebago that's
totally stripped out and we design it to be a medical clinic on the inside. This
is state of the art. Everything is brand new. We do not bill anyone. We're
totally free. And the reason is because the health wagon is an established
charity with a lot of supporters. We're there for our patients really 24 seven
because we are in a small community and we love our people here. The Health
Wagon, Saturday at 12 GMT. When William Tan is not on stage with the Singapore
Symphony Orchestra, he's often in the sea. His other career as an underwater
photographer started with his love of fish, but getting the perfect shot nearly
proved fatal. I was waiting just for the fish to turn back one time and I would
get my shot. Photographers always tell ourself, OK, I can stay for another
minute. And you keep telling yourself, I'll stay another minute. And that puts
you in danger. William Tan's marine adventures after the news. BBC News with
Gareth Barlow. The Japanese space agency has said the launch of its new rocket
has failed after the second stage engine didn't ignite. It's the latest setback
for the H-3, Japan's first new medium lift rocket for three decades. The Mexican
President Andres Manuel López Obrador has said his government is working with
the United States to secure the release of four Americans kidnapped in the
northern city of Matamoros. Mr López Obrador said the US citizens had been
caught up in a gun battle between rival criminal groups. The UN's children's
agency UNICEF estimates that more than a billion women and adolescent girls
across the world are malnourished. It says crises from the war to Covid-19 have
made it increasingly hard for them to get food. President Volodymyr Zelensky has
said in his nightly address that he's instructed Ukraine's military commanders
to find the forces to boost the defence of the besieged city of Bakhmut. Russian
troops now surround it on three sides. Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan
will face a single opponent in May's presidential election after opposition
parties agreed on a joint candidate. Kemal Kaleçdoru leads the Republican
People's Party. The Nicaraguan authorities have closed down the country's
largest business association, COSEP. Once a supporter of the left-wing President
Daniel Ortega, COSEP is the latest organisation to be subjected to a crackdown
on opponents. The defence ministry in Peru says five soldiers drowned during a
confrontation with anti-government protesters in the city of Ilave. It said
they'd been swept away while trying to cross a river to avoid demonstrators. And
officials in the US state of Georgia have charged 23 people, including a
Frenchman and a Canadian, with domestic terrorism offences. Police said the
suspects were part of a group who threw petrol bombs and bricks during a
protest. BBC News. You're back with Outlook. I'm Mubin Azhar. William Tan is
known to fans of classical music as first violinist with the Singapore Symphony
Orchestra. But to the international scuba diving community, he's an award-
winning photographer too. Outlook's Gaia Karamatsa caught up with him and heard
about his underwater adventures. William, when did you start playing the violin?
I started playing the violin rather late. If you want to be really, really good,
you just start at about the age of three or four. But I started at about 11, so
that was pretty late. Why did you start late? I guess my parents didn't know you
need to start earlier. So it wasn't your decision to start playing violin? It
wasn't my decision, no. How did you feel about it when your parents told you
that they would like you to start playing violin? Of course, there is some kind
of resistance. And I remember there was a time I recorded my practice and then I
play back the practice. I locked myself in the room and my dad thought I was
practicing. So you tricked your dad into thinking you were practicing? Yes. So I
guess there was a part of you that didn't really enjoy playing violin.
Practicing is a lot of work. So for a young kid who is not used to it, it is not
easy. Was there something else that you prefer doing? Did you have a certain
passion or interest when you were younger? Keeping fishes. Fishes? I grew up
with a lot of aquariums around the house because my uncles kept a lot of fishes.
Did you have a favorite fish? A Tars pelican wrasse. It's a very beautiful fish.
It is quite ferocious. And even when there are bigger fishes in the tank, it
doesn't get bullied. Oh, it stands up for itself. Yeah, right. So what was it
about that that kind of resonated with you? It was able to take care of itself.
I think that's very important. William would take inspiration from this
courageous fish throughout his life and live thousands of underwater adventures.
Photographers always tell ourselves, OK, I can stay for another minute to get
this shot. When that minute passed, you tell yourself, OK, I will stay another
minute. And you keep telling yourself, I'll stay another minute and that puts
you in danger. But in order to get there, he would spend years playing the
violin and trying to get away from the fish. He would spend years learning the
violin and trying to get away with practicing the least amount possible. I mean,
you say that violin classes started as something that your parents wanted and
that everyone did in Singapore. But at what part of your life did you start
taking it more seriously? I think there came a year when my violin teacher
thought I played rather well and I won some prizes in a number of years. So I
think then it started to become interesting. And how many hours a week were you
practicing the violin? That is a very sensitive question. It's like asking a
lady her age. OK, the violin teacher in Singapore thought I was practicing a
lot. I was practicing very little, actually. I was practicing like, I think,
three, three and a half hours a day. And you were also studying in secondary
school. Did you have kind of a clear idea of what you wanted to do after school?
We were being trained to go into, to become a doctor. And during that year, the
orchestra in Singapore decided that they want to send locals overseas. So
instead of continuing with my studies, I decided to go to the States. Were you
excited to follow a career path in violin? At that time, the young mind thing
that playing music is just playing music, enjoying life instead of studying all
those thick medical books. It was an easy way out at that time. But actually, it
wasn't. What was it like for you to move to the United States? In the beginning,
of course, you are very excited. But once you settle down there, you lose all
your friends. They are all in Singapore. It wasn't easy in the beginning. It
wasn't easy. And when you weren't practicing or studying music, did you have any
interests outside of that? I would walk down to the Inner Harbor. There is an
aquarium there. And I would spend a lot of time there, actually. Oh, really?
Yeah. It reminded you of being at your uncle's house with all the aquariums?
Yeah, yeah, yes. Of course, the animals in this aquarium is a lot larger. So
even though he was far away from home in Maryland, William could still spend
time in a familiar underwater world until he finished his studies and could
finally return to his home in Singapore, where he successfully auditioned for
the Singapore Symphony Orchestra. When I came back, the orchestra was playing
quite well. So all the salary money went into a tank at my house. But the thing
is, in the tank, no matter how hard you try, you could see the fish getting
thinner. I mean, they are not getting bigger. The fish are getting thinner. I
mean, they are not getting enough nutrients. They're not getting enough food. So
after a while, I decided to give up on the tank because you could see that the
fishes are not doing well. Some of the orchestra members were scuba divers. And
so William had to get certified so he could finally experience the underwater
world face to face. When I got certified as a diver, I, of course, bought a
cheaper underwater camera so that I can take photos and I can remember the
trips. And because of my knowledge in fishes, the instructor was asking me the
names of the fish that we saw underwater. I mean, instead of him telling me what
we are seeing, I'm actually telling him what we are seeing. The resort that we
are staying with, they actually asked for pictures to use in their brochure. The
fact that the hotel that you were staying at asked to use your photographs means
that they must have been quite good. Was it the first time you were taking
photographs? Yes. Yes. Really? Yes. So you were just a natural at it? I would
think, no, no, no. I would think they do not have many choices. You're modest.
Very modest. So after that trip, were you kind of enamored by photography? Yes.
Without the camera, I don't think I would dive. Can you tell me about a dive, a
particular moment, a particular photograph that you took that has kind of stayed
in your memory? I remember going to Sri Lanka and we were trying to shoot the
sperm whales. There was one day the sea was like really, really, really flat.
And through the camera, you could see three of them actually break away from the
pod and came towards my direction. Of course, when they get near you, they will
start to dive down and you could see the whales and their reflections on the
water. That was quite an impressive memory. In that moment when you were
surrounded by three massive sperm whales, did you feel overwhelmed or scared? So
I had one big female whale coming towards me. Through the viewfinder, it is
still quite small, so it swam in front of me and then, you know, when the head
went past the camera, there's no point to shoot anymore. So I took the camera
down and the body, I mean, it's as tall, it's taller than the bus. It's taller
than the bus. So, you know, at that time I was really afraid. Have there been
any situations underwater that have made you fear for your life? I told myself
when I started diving, I said, you know, I would not dive in Australian waters
because the day I see a great white is the day I stop diving. But there is this
island in South Maldives, it's called Fuvamula. And when I was on a liveaboard
boat, and then they told me if we go a bit deeper, we could see the tiger shark.
And the first time, of course, I went down, I mean, they were pointing and
pointing, the water was so murky, shark likes murky water like this. So we were
quite deep and they were pointing and pointing and pointing. So I swam forward
and I could see a small fish. It was a tiger shark swimming in front of me. And
by the time I could see the stripes, it turned towards me and I realised how big
the head was and I was really frightened. And it came closer and closer and it
didn't turn. So I stopped shooting, I put my camera down. I didn't know what it
was trying to do and it came and what I did was I pushed the camera towards the
shark. I was trying to use the camera to push the shark away. It was really
touching distance. If I put my hands, I could touch it. Wow. Yeah. After that
sort of encounter with nature, with the wildest nature, how does that feel in
that moment? It felt very special and somehow you kept telling yourself, well, I
want that to happen again. So you kept going back to the place, waiting for it
to happen again. Is there some sort of like adrenaline rush that you get? Yes,
definitely, definitely. So has that adrenaline rush like ever put you in a
situation where you've risked your life? Photographers always tell ourselves,
okay, I can stay for another minute to get this shot. When that minute passed,
you tell yourself, okay, I will stay another minute. And you keep telling
yourself, I'll stay another minute and that puts you in danger. There was one
time I remembered in Okasawara, it's a very, very far island from Japan. It's
very difficult to get to. Most of the Japanese knows about this island, but most
of them hasn't been there because it's really, really far. I was diving there to
shoot an endemic angelfish. They told us the fish will be at about 40-something
meters. So, you know, we were prepared for deep dives like this. We went down,
there were other Japanese photographers, they wanted to shoot as well. So they
were chasing the fish around and the fish left. So I went down, I saw the fish,
I tried to swim towards the fish, of course the fish has his tail towards me all
the time. We were against current and I was waiting just for the fish to turn
back one time and I would get my shot. But it didn't happen. So I waited and
waited and waited. I waited and waited and waited. Scuba diving presents
multiple dangers. And running out of air is definitely high up on the list of
the ones you want to avoid. But if a diver surfaces too quickly, nitrogen
bubbles can form in their bloodstream and this can be deadly. I told myself,
okay, this is about time that I really should head up. And I started heading up.
And somewhere up, I would know that I would be very low on air. So I saw a
couple at about 20 meters. So what I did was I signaled to them and I signaled
to the lady diver because ladies could use a lot less air than men. So I
signaled to her that I was going to go down and I was going to go down. And look
at you, my dear, ladies and men. So I signal to her that I would like to share
her air to ascend. And then I took my air gauge and I was trying to show her how
much air I have left. I looked at my computer. I still had about nine minutes of
the decompression to do, and I had no air left. So you had nine minutes to wait
and you had zero air? Yes, yes, yes. William hadn't noticed how far he had gone
down, frantically chasing his underwater muse against the current, using much
more air than he was supposed to. For a photograph, for a fish, he risked it
all. If the couple wasn't there, I would have died there and then. When you came
up for air on the boat back from the diving trip, what was going through your
mind? The only sentence in my mind was, that was so stupid. After a close
encounter with death, William was only more determined to become a better
underwater photographer. His work gained international recognition, and after
more than a thousand dives, he started working as a judge for underwater
photography competitions. But let's not forget about his day job. We've been
talking a lot about, you know, your underwater photography. That's obviously a
massive passion of yours. But how were you juggling this with your full-time, I
mean, full-time job, which was playing in the orchestra in Singapore? With much
difficulties, with much difficulties. I remember there was one time I was away
for, I think, five or six weeks, and I came back and the music was Italian
symphony. Italian symphony is very tough on the violin part. And, you know, the
conductor took it so fast, and the first rehearsal, I was like, oh my God. And
when you are, of course, at the back, you get to rest a bit more. You don't have
to work so hard. But when you're in front, you have to work a lot harder. And at
that time, my rotation puts me right beside the concertmaster. And, you know,
you haven't touched the violin for five or six weeks. You're playing Italian
symphony beside the concertmaster, right under the eye of the conductor at that
absolutely fast speed. It was, of course, very, very, very stressful. Do you
feel like there's any similarities between playing the violin and shooting
underwater photography? I think they are both a form of art, and they are both
working towards something beautiful. So I think when you are proficient in one,
it helps the other one to improve. What is the most important lesson that you've
learned from being underwater? I feel that being honest to yourself, being
honest to the animals you are shooting, knowing how to respect the other life
forms, I think this is very, very important. That was Gaya Karamatsa speaking to
violinist and underwater photographer William Tan from his home in Singapore.
That's nearly it for today. Tomorrow, I'll be talking to the actor Alina Khan,
the pioneering trans star of the Pakistani film Joyland. Alina's had an amazing,
driven life. She was rejected by family and society as a child when she was
growing up in Lahore, and she was forced for a time onto the streets. She found
escape and made a living by dancing, but was vulnerable to predators. I had a
principle that no one was allowed to touch me. I told them, if you want to give
me the money, you can, but you can't exploit me. I had made up my mind that I
would live my life in a better way. I would tell people this is art. I show you
art and take money for this. So don't have any wrong expectations from me. But
Alina became known for her dancing, and this led eventually to a role in the
film Joyland. She plays Biba, a determined and fiery trans woman, and Joyland
recently won the jury prize at the Cannes Film Festival. Alina told me what the
role meant to her. When I read the character of Biba for the first time, I was
really pleased to know that trans people weren't victims in this story. We were
not oppressed. Biba has all the emotions, happiness, anger, sadness, jealousy. I
liked that she was a real character, struggling and fighting with her
circumstances, as many trans people do. So I was happy that as Biba, I was not a
sorry figure, and I was part of these lives of other characters. She's stubborn,
angry and a doer. That's coming up in the next edition of Outlook. From me,
Mubin Azhar, and the whole Outlook team, thanks for listening. Octavia was the
first science fiction author to receive that award. So she was representing not
just her ethnicity and not just her gender, but the genre. That's author Nissi
Schall. Sounds like it was a moment of triumph on several fronts. But it wasn't
easy for Octavia to reach these heights, especially in her early years when
there wasn't much money around. Octavia was born in 1947 in Pasadena, Southern
California, and spent her early years living on a dusty chicken ranch which had
no running water. She was dyslexic, but she loved reading. However, her family
couldn't afford to buy her any books. A lot of the books that Octavia was
entertained by were basically cast-offs from the families that her grandmother
worked for. Her grandmother would bring home things that were basically being
either donated to the library or, you know, thrown in the trash, and she would
rescue them and bring them home to Octavia. And she loved reading those books.
They helped to fire her imagination, as Octavia told Terry Gross on National
Public Radio's Fresh Air in 1993. I was an only child, and I was, I guess you
could say, very much my own person. I kind of constructed my own world as I went
along. Octavia's mind became full of alternative worlds. And then she discovered
superhero comics. She loved characters that had crazy powers, like being able to
fly and travel in time. It inspired Octavia to write her own superhero comics.
It inspired Octavia to write her own stories, which she jotted down on scraps of
paper and would show to her mother. She also loved watching science fiction
movies. We saw this with our own eyes, an object the like of which we had never
seen before, a frightening, strange shape descending from outer space with
relentless pulse. That's Devil Girl from Mars, which Octavia sat down to watch
on the television one evening. And that's when everything changed, because it
wasn't brilliant. Nissy Shull. It's yawningly bad. It's not so bad that it's
riveting and exciting. It's just plain boring. She saw and came to two
realisations almost simultaneously. First of all, someone got paid for doing
this. And second of all, I could get paid for doing something better than this.
Amazing to think something so boring and so bad was the spark for Octavia to
become one of the most creative writers of her generation. Whilst at college in
the 1960s, she entered writing competitions. However, she felt she didn't get
much support from those close to her. The family said, oh, you can write in your
spare time and you can, you know, write as a hobby, whatever, but the idea of
writing for a living was completely alien. I accepted the idea that you had to
work for a living, but I didn't accept the idea that you had to do something you
hated just because it paid. At first, Octavia did have to take on odd jobs for
money. She was even a potato chip inspector for a while. She did writing for a
few hours every morning at 2am in her tiny Los Angeles apartment. All that hard
work began to pay off in the 1970s when her first novels were published. Her
books were full of alien creatures and invented planets. But Octavia had bigger
interests than even the extraordinary world she created. What worried her was
much closer to home, the country she was born, raised and lived in. She was
concerned about racial injustice and climate change. There weren't many science
fiction books about climate change. There weren't many science fiction books
that covered these subjects. Many people just didn't get it. So it was no
surprise that it took a while for her to get an agent. When she did, she went on
a book tour. But it didn't go well. There were no customers lined up to get her
signature. She was just sitting there giving people directions to the bathroom,
basically. She told one woman who was standing nearby, you should read this
book. It's really good. I wrote it. The woman said, well, what kind of book is
it? And Octavia said, it's science fiction. And the woman said, oh, well, I
don't read science fiction. These encounters underlined that Octavia faced many
challenges. She would place motivational quotes around her apartment to help
with her resilience. She would write these notes on notebook pages, on napkins,
on scraps of paper. And she would underline and sometimes multiply underline
things that were important to her, you know, goals that she knew she needed to
reach. I will become a New York Times bestseller. I will become well-known. And
then she would always finish with these exhortations to herself. So be it. See
to it. And that's what she did. She kept writing and in 1979, Kindred was
published. It was seen as one of her breakthrough novels. It's the story of
Dana, a young black woman. She time travels from the 1970s California to
Maryland on the east coast of the United States. She goes back to the 1800s to a
pre-Civil War plantation where she visits her ancestors, some who are enslaved.
When she was researching the book, Octavia didn't want to just rely on history
books. She wanted to feel the places Dana would visit. So she planned a road
trip. But as a black woman, she felt vulnerable. The money to buy the bus ticket
came from selling a book. That was how she got the money to buy the bus ticket,
to stay in the hotel that she stayed in, which was not a good hotel. She was
actually there in the location in Maryland, all by herself, a black woman, all
alone. Kindred, the book that came out of that trip, was described as a rare
magical artifact by fellow renowned science fiction writer, Harlem Ellison.
Another big hit was Parable of the Sower, published in 1993. The work flashes
forward to the United States in the mid-2020s. It portrays a hellish world where
society has fallen apart and people are pitted against each other. Here's
Octavia on National Public Radio reading from it. People are setting fires to
get rid of whomever they dislike, from personal enemies to anyone who looks or
sounds foreign or racially different. People are setting fires because they're
frustrated, angry, hopeless. They have no power to improve their lives, but they
have the power to make others even more miserable. And the only way to prove to
yourself that you have power is to use it. That's Octavia's vision of America in
2024. There are people who say, Octavia tried to tell us, they name her as a
prophet of the day, as a prophet of the days that we are experiencing now in the
US. She also saw people operating out of fear, making choices out of fear.
Octavia Butler died in 2006 at the age of 58. During her life, she'd faced
poverty, racism and sexism, but she persisted through it all and became one of
America's most celebrated science fiction writers. Her friend, Nissy Shull, was
talking to me, Alex Collins, for that episode of Witness History. The
conversation spoke to two women who are continuing to shake up and diversify the
science fiction genre. To me, it is fiction that is exploring the liberation
ideology of the Black diaspora through speculative fiction. There's a sense of
going back and rediscovering the things that we were either denied or lied to
about. For more, head to bbcworldservice.com forward slash the conversation. In
half an hour, we're in the studio. The poet Ada Limon has just been given a
unique commission. She's been asked by NASA, the American Space Agency, to write
a poem that will be sent into space. For In the Studio, we follow Ada's creative
process as she writes a poem for NASA.