TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
...a flung scarf across the sky. And tomorrow it's the little howl. Good
morning, it's six o'clock on Tuesday the 21st of February. This is today with
Michel Assane in London and Nick Robinson in Warsaw. The main news this morning,
President Biden will use a speech here in Warsaw to describe the war in Ukraine
as a battle between democracy and autocracy. We'll be looking ahead to that
speech and another, President Putin's State of the Union to be delivered in
Moscow. The US President will be meeting the leaders of Russia's neighbours who
fear that they could be next. I've been to the Estonian city of Narva where the
border with Russia is just across the river. For now, when I'm standing here on
a border where I can at least know that, okay, there is no way that I'm going to
that site. You can't make that journey. I'm not going this journey anymore, I
guess, for many, many years. I've been speaking to the Prime Minister of
Estonia, NATO's leading hawk. She explains to us how aggressors negotiate during
a time of war. First, you claim something that has never been yours. Second, you
present threats, ultimatums, you terrorise. And third, you don't give one inch
in negotiations because there will always be people in the West who offer you
something. So in the end, you have something or one third or even one half of
something you didn't have before. Also coming up this morning after another
earthquake in the parts of Turkey and Syria hit two weeks ago, we'll be hearing
how the ongoing relief effort is being affected. A pilot study of a four-day
working week is called a success by most of the employers who took part. We'll
talk to one of them. And after Nicola Bulli's family called the actions of parts
of the press, some broadcasters and members of the public appalling, what should
we all learn? The BBC News is read by Caroline Nichols. The contrasting
realities of the invasion of Ukraine are likely to be laid bare by Joe Biden and
Vladimir Putin, as both leaders give major speeches. The US president is in
Poland to meet NATO allies. In Moscow this morning, President Putin will deliver
his State of the Nation address. It was cancelled in December because of a
number of Russian setbacks in Ukraine. Our Russia editor, Steve Rosenberg,
reports from Moscow. Russia's president will use this address to parliament to
try to shore up domestic support for what he still calls the Special Military
Operation. It will be an opportunity for him to repeat, rebroadcast the
Kremlin's false narrative, according to which Ukraine and the West started this
war and Russia is acting in self-defense. For the Kremlin leader, the Special
Operation has not gone at all, according to plan. What was supposed to have
lasted a few days, at most a few weeks, is said to enter its second year with no
end in sight. As well as bringing misery to Ukraine, the invasion has resulted
in heavy casualties for the Russian military. And hundreds of thousands of
Russian citizens have been drafted into the army. President Biden arrived back
in Poland last night after visiting Ukraine. He'll deliver a speech in Warsaw
and meet leaders of NATO countries in Eastern Europe. Here's our North America
editor, Sarah Smith. President Biden will describe the war in Ukraine as a
battle between democracy and autocracy and declare that after a year of
fighting, it's democracy that has the upper hand. The president's surprise visit
to Kiev yesterday, appearing alongside President Zelensky, was designed to be a
vivid, physical demonstration of his commitment to continue supporting Ukraine,
as he often says, for as long as it takes. But some politicians, on the further
extremes of both the left and the right in America, are now expressing doubts
about how long the US can afford to continue supplying the Ukrainian defence
forces, and polls suggest public support is also declining. So the message Mr
Biden wants to deliver on this trip is aimed as much at an American audience at
home as it is for the people of Poland and Ukraine. A second major rescue
operation is resuming in southern Turkey and northern Syria, after more
earthquakes hit the region. The epicenters are in Défany in Hatai. At least
three people are known to have died. More than 200 others have been taken to
hospital. Two earthquakes earlier this month killed almost 45,000 people. The
United Nations says it's ready to provide additional support. HSBC has reported
an annual fall in pre-tax profits of more than 7 percent. The bank made the
equivalent of £14.5 billion in 2022. The fall is being attributed to charges as
part of the upcoming sale of HSBC's French retail operations. A BBC
investigation has found that a quarter of England's grammar schools have hardly
any pupils from poorer families, despite most taking steps to be more inclusive.
An informal agreement between the government and the schools aimed at making
them more socially diverse expired last year. Here's our education editor,
Braman Jeffries. The number of grammar school places in England has grown
markedly in the last decade, and has has pressure for them to admit more
children from the lowest income families. But BBC analysis has found a quarter
of the 160 grammar schools that admit pupils at age 11 still have fewer than 5
percent of children who are disadvantaged. That makes them outliers. Less than
half a percent of all the other non-selective secondaries in England have such a
low level. Listening over four-day working weeks suggests it doesn't harm the
performance of companies, and leaves employees feeling healthier and happier. 61
businesses across the UK took part in the world's biggest trial, organised by
researchers here and in the United States, along with the campaign group Four
Day Week Global. Almost all of the firms involved say they're sticking with the
arrangement. More details from our business correspondent, Emma Simpson. 61
companies from a local fish and chip shop and a brewery to software developers
and recruitment firms took part in this big experiment, shortening workers'
hours for no loss in pay. Each firm managed it in their own way. Organisers say
the vast majority of companies were satisfied with their business performance,
with 23 finding their revenues had broadly stayed the same. The biggest benefits
were to staff wellbeing. Sick days were down by more than two-thirds, and
workers' reporting being less stressed, less tired and overall happier. The
dramatisation of Gareth Southgate's reign in charge of the England football team
is to make its debut on stage this summer. The production's title, Dear England,
takes its inspiration from an open letter Southgate wrote during Euro 2020. In
it, he defended his player's decision to continue taking the knee in opposition
to racism. The play will be staged at the National Theatre in London and will
feature Joseph Fiennes at Southgate. Caroline, thank you very much. The time is
nearly seven minutes past six. Let's check in with Sarah at the Weather Centre
for the latest forecast. Morning, Sarah. Morning, Michelle. We've got another
mild day out there today. Fairly cloudy for most of us, but largely dry and
lighter winds than we had yesterday, with the best of any brightness generally
to be found further east. So for South East England, the Midlands, Eastern
England, North East England and Eastern Scotland, a bit of brightness breaking
through the cloud at times through the course of today. I think particularly so
for Eastern Scotland, where we could see temperatures around about 15 degrees or
so. But across the region in general, we're looking at highs about 12 to 14
degrees. For the south west of England, Wales, North West England, South West
Scotland and Northern Ireland today, thicker cloud here. And that will produce
some mist, some fog and some drizzle on and off at times as well. But it won't
be as blustery as yesterday and top temperatures here, 11 or 12 degrees. Lastly
today for Northern Scotland, a fairly breezy day ahead here. And the cloud will
be producing outbreaks of rain on and off through this morning, perhaps easing a
bit through the middle part of the day before more rain moves in during the
evening. But temperatures here around about 10 to 11 degrees. Then overnight
tonight, we're going to see some colder air just starting to move in as a cold
front approaches from the west. So the outlook then, some rain tracking east
across the UK tomorrow, perhaps even a bit of winteriness over the very highest
ground in the north. And then it does look colder, but also drier towards the
end of the week. Thank you, Sarah. It is now eight minutes past six. Let's take
a look at the morning papers. What's on the news websites as well. Pictures of
President Biden and Zelensky on the streets of Kiev are on many front pages. The
Guardian's correspondent in the city, Luke Harding, describes Mr Biden's
surprise visit as arguably the most consequential made by a US president to a
European country since the end of the Cold War. The Daily Mail calls Mr Biden's
trip a daring act of defiance. For the times, it was symbolic proof of Russia's
failure. US national security adviser John Bolton, however, writing in The
Telegraph, argues that NATO leaders have little reason to pat themselves on the
back. He says the West, having failed to deter Vladimir Putin from starting the
war, now lacks a strategy for victory. He says NATO should provide more aid to
Ukraine instead of fearing that Mr Putin could expand the war. The Financial
Times highlights a warning from the Dutch military intelligence that Russia
might attempt to sabotage its offshore wind farms in the North Sea. The head of
the intelligence agency said a ship had been detected trying to map energy
infrastructure in recent months and was escorted away by the Dutch Navy and
Coast Guard. According to The Times, Rishi Sunak has been told that some
ministers are prepared to resign if a deal he is trying to reach with the EU
risks Northern Ireland's place within the UK. The prime minister spent several
hours yesterday meeting Eurosceptic Conservative MPs trying to address their
concerns about a new agreement on post-Brexit trade arrangements for Northern
Ireland. Mr said some of his colleagues in the government could quit, or would
quit if Mr Sunak attempted to push through a deal that undermined sovereignty.
An editorial in The Guardian says the prime minister is taking a risk by doing
the right thing and seeking to normalise relations with the EU. Resolving the
situation in Northern Ireland, the paper argues, would grease UK-EU trade and
help the British economy recover faster. But the paper says Mr Sunak is leaving
his right wing exposed as hardline Brexiteers and his political enemies, most
notably Boris Johnson, lie in wait to pounce. The Daily Mail likens the prime
minister's position to that of a tightrope walker without a safety net. It says
that with Labour's support he could push through a deal that isn't acceptable to
the democratic unionists and many of his own backbenches, but that could also be
his political suicide. Photographs of Nicola Bullier on the front pages again
after police confirmed that her body had been found. The headline in The Sun,
The Express and The Daily Mail quote her family's statement saying she can rest
now. Another sentence from the statement makes the mirrors headline, she was the
centre of our world. The paper says the case is fascinated the public but is
left only heartbreak and hostility. And the Times says the Queen consort is back
to new awards scheme for the coronation to honour the unsung heroes who
volunteer to help their communities. The public are being encouraged to submit
nominations in eight categories, among them supporting older people, crisis and
welfare and sustainability and the environment. It's 11 minutes past six. Now as
confirmation came yesterday that the body found in the river wire was Nicola
Bullie, so too did the family statement calling the actions of the press and
members of the public appalling. Rowan Bridges, our North of England reporter
who followed the story from the moment that Nicola went missing. Take us through
that family statement first of all Rowan. Yes, well I mean I think what you
really feel from it is the way that their grief and sadness has really been
compounded as they feel by the way they have been treated by sections of the
media and the press and social media. They talk about how for example one day
that they'll have to explain to the children of Nicola Bullie that the press and
members of the public accused their dad of wrongdoing, misquoted and vilified
friends and family and then they went on to the press and other media channels
and so-called professionals not know when to stop. These are our lives and our
children's lives and they directly singled out two broadcasters, Sky News and
ITV for contacting them in the aftermath of Nicola's death despite being asked
for privacy. Now the BBC understands Sky News has had an open dialogue with Ms
Bullie's family and the police since she went missing and ITV have been
approached for comment but clearly it has left, it has really sort of amplified
their feelings about all of this, the way they have been treated. And then you
get on to the whole social media aspect of it as well. But and a lot of the
reporting in the papers today, well some of it is quite selective, for example
picking up and focusing on what they had to say about social media and about the
two broadcasters. But it is clear when you look at the family's statement that
they are angry with newspapers, at least some newspapers as well. They took it
upon themselves to run stories about us to sell papers. Yeah, and if you
remember there was the statement that was put out about, sorry, the police had
come in for criticism, one of the criticisms or concerns that had been raised
was about the decision of the police to release details about Nicola Bullie,
about her struggles with the menopause and alcohol. And the family put out a
statement the next day around that saying that they were aware that people were
trying to sell stories about Nicola to the press. And I think that was one of
the reasons why they decided to put that stuff out there. So there's clearly a
lot of criticism across the board about how they feel they've been treated. And
also, I think there is an element of just like when there is a big story, and
you will have been at these things, TV trucks turn up in a small place. The
village where this took place is about 600 people. And suddenly there are TV
trucks and the national media descend on a place. And that that in itself can
just cause distress and friction and resentment as well. Rowan, thanks very
much. It's coming up to 40 minutes past six. The United States will back Ukraine
for long as long as it takes. That was the promise. That was the symbolism of
the visit to Kiev by President Biden. And he will reinforce that in a speech
here in Warsaw later today. Let's talk to James Waterhouse, our correspondent in
Kiev this morning. No doubt on the morning after that day before, regarded still
as a coup, James, coming as it did before President Putin's big State of the
Union speech. Absolutely, Nick. I think here we are once more where while
Ukraine continues to defend itself at great cost, the global forces are at play
once more. We have all of the political goings on where you are. And we have, I
imagine, wary eyes looking over towards Moscow when Vladimir Putin gives his
State of the Nation speech. He's addressed to the parliament in Moscow where
traditionally he outlines his plans for the upcoming year. But you can be in
little doubt that what he still calls the special military operation, well that
will come up. What is he going to announce in speeches gone by when an
escalation has been feared that hasn't always come? He's instead talked about
the ongoing need for it to happen. That could be different now. He's already
mobilized hundreds of thousands of men. He's increased the manufacture of
weapons and ammunition to the concern of Kiev, especially given the time delay
between Western aid being promised and it being delivered and used on the
battlefield. But you're right. This is a city, Kiev, which is, I think, still
basking in the glow of the leader of the free world visiting here yesterday.
It's a fine morning and we just have to remind ourselves that little over a year
ago on this stretch of street that leads to the Golden Domes of St Michael's
Cathedral, this was a city with a very different feel. People were driving in
panic along the cobbled roads. They were leaving in their thousands. The city
almost hollowed out. Others were signing up to join the territorial defence.
They're being issued with an automatic rifle. There was a very nervous and
different feel to Kiev. But yesterday the symbolism was plain to see.
Politically, I think what President Zelensky will hope comes from that is that
the Western aid will not only keep coming, but that it will arrive faster in
order for his country to not just defend itself, but ultimately prevail and
repel Russia completely. A lot needs to happen. James Waterhouse in Kiev, thank
you very much indeed. I can't help remembering, though, that it was a speech by
President Putin, which hours later led to the order to invade Ukraine. So
alongside that excitement in Kiev, no doubt some nervousness too. It is just
after quarter past six and on a day when we have HSBC's results coming out, our
business news from Salford is with Rahul Tandon. Morning, Rahul. Morning,
Michelle. Yes, it's one of the last of the big London-listed banks to publish
results, and they show that HSBC has benefited like many other banks have from
those rising interest rates. The London-based lender reported profits before tax
of $5.2 billion for the last three months of 2022, almost doubling from the same
time a year earlier. However, pre-tax profits for the whole year fell by $1.4
billion to $17.5 billion, as it observes the cost of selling its French retail
banking operations, Europe's largest bank, also indicated it's on track to
deliver higher returns this year than last. Let's get some thoughts now. So
Philip Auger, who is an independent banking expert, huge profits that we're
seeing banks like HSBC making at the moment, those are from those rising
interest rates, and those could continue for quite some time. Yes, indeed. I
think it's quite a confident set of results from HSBC. They're different to the
other UK-quoted banks that have reported recently that we had Nat Western
Barclays a few days ago. It's different in the sense that HSBC, you get a global
outlook. Most of the profits come from Asia. And actually, although they're
suitably cautious, an uneven macroeconomic outlook, they say, actually if you
read through their statement, they're actually quite optimistic about the global
economy in 2023. It's interesting, isn't it, when you talk there about the fact
that a lot of their profits are coming from Asia. Does that mean that the UK is
less important to them now? We're seeing them cutting down on their branches
here, aren't they? Well, we are. Yeah, this is a global bank. Asia is two-thirds
of the business. Europe is under 20% of the business. It's a different kind of
beast to the Lloyds, NatWests, and RBSs. Obviously, it's a significant player in
the UK banking market. But for the company as a whole, this is a global bank.
And that's their whole strategy. One thing that we've seen MPs talking about
recently at Westminster is when we're discussing interest rate rises. They're
talking about some banks maybe not passing those interest rate rises on to
saving accounts. But I think when we look at the profits that banks are making,
HSBC, today, that that conversation is going to get louder now. I think it will.
I think savers have got legitimate questions to ask of the banks. Why are you so
quick to put up our mortgage rates? And are you so slow to pass on the effects
of increased interest rates to our savings accounts? I think it is a significant
issue for the banks to face. They are saying, aren't they, that the interest
rate cycle is beginning to peak. They're saying that interest rates are not
going to continue to go up and that everything will stabilize. But I think this
is a fair question, particularly since borrowers are having difficulty meeting
interest repayments at a time of high inflation and squeeze on living standards.
You say it's a fair question. What is the answer to it then? Well, the way this
works is that commentators, media commentators, you, me, others and parliament
and consumer groups have to keep on applying the pressure. The bank's response,
of course, is that we've got duties to shareholders as well as consumers and we
have to get a balance right. My sense actually is that the balance has got
slightly wrong in the last few months. A lot of people listening to this will
want to know what's going to happen to interest rates. Obviously, are making
good profits as those interest rates continue to rise. With the state of the
economy at the moment, do you think they will continue to make those profits for
some time yet or will they begin to taper off? The message coming out of the
banks is, look, don't expect this increase in the net interest margin. That's
the difference between what we pay to savers and what we charge borrowers. Don't
expect this to continue to increase. We're talking about a flattening in the
rate of increase in interest charges. I think that what we're looking at from
the banks now is probably another year of growth, but nothing particularly
dramatic. Philip, thank you so much for joining us this morning, giving his
thoughts there on the results of HSBC. Now, the Financial Conduct Authority has
revealed that the number of investors reporting possible investment scams to it
over the past five years has now nearly tripled. I'm joined by Mark Stewart,
Executive Director of Enforcement and Market Oversight at the FCA. Good morning
to you. Thank you for joining us here. Mark, give us an idea. We talk about
scams. What sort of things are we seeing happening specifically? Well, the ones
that we are seeing reported to us are investment scams. So for the most part,
investment scams are also seeing advanced loan fee fraud scams as well. They're
credit type scams, but there's sorts of things that I think we'd expect to see
in times of the cost of living crisis as we are, people being lured into too
good to be true investments and into too good to be true loans as well. If that
is the situation at the moment, what is being done to try and protect people to
make sure that they don't fall victims to these scams? Well, today we're
launching a new Scam Smart campaign. Scam Smart is the pages on our FCA website
that provide information on how consumers can avoid being scammed, what to look
out for. And the campaign is all about understanding the way scammers are
operating and how they're using our behavioral vulnerabilities to exploit
consumers and what consumers can do to spot this for themselves. And we know
that the ability to detect and spot these things, particularly the obvious signs
of scams, is the best way to protect yourself from becoming a victim in the
first place. Yes, we will pursue scammers, work with the police and with the
NCA, but it's much better to prevent this in the first place. So understanding
how scammers are operating, how scammers are using our own behavioral traits and
vulnerabilities is a great way to ensure that you're protected. So Scam Smart is
a lot of information based on real experience from victims, which tells us
exactly how scammers are operating the telltale signs of scams. Yeah, but the
problem is if it's tripling, is that an indication that maybe the FCA is not
being as effective as it should be? Well, what's tripling is people reporting
it. It doesn't mean that they're victims themselves. So we encourage people, if
they spot and see scams, to tell us about it so that we can then turn that into
warnings. And we've increased the number of alerts that we place on our warning
list, which is also on our Scam Smart page so people can check out what to do.
But do you have the resources to deal with this? Because that is a question that
is often looked at. Let me finish because this is about prevention, for the most
part. And what we're doing here is that the campaign today is giving people
information and tactics on how to avoid being scammed in the first place. So
using our register, not using unauthorized investment firms, not using
unauthorized consumer lenders, using firms that are on our register that have
been checked out. They're allowed to do this sort of business in the first place
that have the rules and the protections that the regulatory system provides. All
of that is part of the protection that is offered to consumers. And I think
consumers will be happy to hear that. I would like to press you on this because
if we're seeing the problem increasing, which is what you said at the start of
the conversation, you need more resources. Do you have adequate resources at the
moment? Well, we can't, we don't, we're not a fraud agency. So we work with the
police in pursuing scammers. We pursue scammers who are undertaking regulated
activities without authorization. We have many cases in court all the time. But
the point of this campaign is not about pursuing scammers. It's about providing
consumers with information that allows them to protect themselves better. Of
course, as well, our sister agency, the payments services regulator, is also
consulting at the moment for a scheme that will provide mandated redress for
victims of push payment fraud. So there are lots of things going on to protect
consumers. It's not just about pursuing the scammers. Mark, thank you so much
for joining us there. Let's have a look at what's been happening in the market.
Sophie Lundy Eats, who's equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdowne, is with us. Can
we get your thoughts on those HSBC figures that we were discussing earlier with
Philip? How would you think the markets are going to respond to this? Hi, good
morning. I mean, I would agree that it's, you know, I think you describe them as
a confident set of results. And I do agree with that. I do wonder how the
market's going to take that macroeconomic outlook. So they did call it uneven.
And they were quite cautious in a lot of what they were saying there. There was
a little bit of optimism peppered in there. But I think that the market could
see a bit of negative reaction to some of the caution there. But news of extra
shareholders, shareholder returns coming through, you know, they're selling the
Canadian business to the tune of around 10 billion dollars. And the news that a
lot of that's going to be funneled back to shareholders should be taken pretty
positively. So Philip alluded to this earlier. We talk a lot, don't we, on the
business news here about huge profits that energy companies are making at the
moment. The banks are not making such huge profits, but they are making, you
know, large sums of money at the moment. Do you think there are going to be more
questions about the banks as we move forward? I do. Yes, I think at the moment
that savers are in a really, really difficult spot. And we know at the moment as
well, it's so front of mind because of what inflation is doing to people's cash
as well. It's really eroding the value. So I think particularly question marks
over the rates that are going to be available on accounts and the speed at which
they are available when interest rates are high is certainly an prudent question
to be asking. But at the same time, banks are starting to kind of batten down
the hatches and then think about this idea that the narrative is shifting to the
idea that interest rates are going to start slowing, if not coming down, dare we
say it. So they are starting to prepare for that as well. So it's not purely cut
and dry as to when savers might feel the benefit of that. Briefly, if you don't
mind, it's a difficult subject. We're going to get those figures on the
government's public borrowing. What do you expect to see? I expect to see a
great deal of borrowing. We saw last time in December, public sector borrowing
was at about 20, just over 27 billion pounds. And that's the highest since
monthly records began. And I expect things to be in a similar vein. The
government is still throwing an awful lot of money, particularly at things like
energy bill support. All that fully unwind, we're not going to see borrowing
come down to more normalized levels. More on that in an hour's time. Thank you
very much, Sophie. Rahul, thank you very much. Now, though, Rob's here with the
sport. Morning, Rob. Morning, Michelle. Well, the question for Liverpool
Football Club and its fans this morning is whether the players can sustain their
recent domestic form and build an advantage tonight in their Champions League
First Lake tie against Real Madrid at Anfield. Wins from their last two Premier
League matches after a barren January have left manager Jurgen Klopp saying he's
relieved that this tie wasn't played last month, but that his side, of course,
need not one but two. And I quote him super games. Here's our football
correspondent, John Murray. Liverpool's hope is that they've rediscovered their
form just in time for this first leg meeting with the newly crowned FIFA Club
World Champions. The recent two nil wins over Everton and Newcastle, coupled
with important players returning from injury, can only have helped confidence.
And the Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp hopes Darwin Nunez will have recovered
enough from injuring his shoulder on Saturday to play a part tonight. Klopp said
it was torture for him watching back last season's Champions League final defeat
to Carlo Ancelotti's team when Real Madrid became European champions for a
record fourteenth time, but he would likely settle for any sort of lead to take
to the Spanish capital in three weeks' time. And the other Liverpool line this
morning is that the club's American owner John Henry says he's not selling the
club but does expect some investment. Here are some quotes. Are we selling
Liverpool Football Club? No, Henry told the Boston Sports Journal. Are we
talking with investors about LFC? Yes. Will something happen there? I believe
so.