TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 writes a poem for NASA. The Newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service,
the world's radio station. It's 4 hours GMT. I'm Charlotte Gallagher and this is
The Newsroom. Four US citizens are kidnapped in a Mexican city, racked by gang
violence. It's always dangerous and currently in the grip of kind of fighting
between two splinter groups from the Gulf cartels. We get the latest from our
correspondent. As Ukraine pledges to continue to defend Bakhmut, we hear the
reality of the front line. Why Bruce Willis' wife is pleading with the
paparazzi. For the video people, please don't be yelling at my husband, asking
him how he's doing or whatever the woohooing and the yippee kaiyay is. Just
don't do it, okay? And... We hear about the dark side of Japan's music industry,
plus the amazing story and survival of premature twins. First, the news. BBC
News, hello, I'm Gareth Barlow. The Japanese space agency has said the launch of
its new rocket has failed after the second stage engine didn't ignite. It's the
latest setback for the H-3, Japan's first new medium lift rocket for three
decades. From Tokyo, Shoma Khalil reports. Japan's new flagship H-3 rocket was
ordered to self-destruct minutes after it lifted off for the first time. It was
carrying a disaster management land observation satellite that was equipped with
an experimental infrared sensor designed to detect North Korean ballistic
missile launches. This is a blow to the country's efforts to expand its access
to space and remain competitive. The H-3 has been designed to lift government
and commercial satellites into Earth's orbit and to take supplies to the
International Space Station. The Mexican president, Andres Manuel López Obrador,
has said his government is working with the United States to secure the release
of four Americans kidnapped in the northern city of Matamoros. The FBI has
offered a $50,000 reward for information leading to the return of the US
citizens. From Mexico City, Will Grant reports. President López Obrador gave
more details about the kidnappings than the US authorities were prepared to
confirm. In particular, he said that the four US citizens had been caught up in
a firefight between rival groups in the city of Matamoros and said that they had
travelled to the city to buy medication. Residents of US border towns often
travel into Mexico to buy prescription drugs, which are available at much lower
prices than in the United States. However, Matamoros is a dangerous city to
visit at the best of times. Rival factions of the Gulf cartel have been engaged
in a violent conflict for months. The UN's children's agency UNICEF says the
number of pregnant women and girls who are suffering from malnutrition has
soared by a quarter in the last two years in fragile countries like Somalia,
Ethiopia and Afghanistan. It's urged the international community to make food
security a priority. Nomi Grimley has more details. UNICEF estimates that more
than one billion women across the world are malnourished. The agency is worried
that crises around the world have made it increasingly hard for women and girls
to get the food they need. Girls in Afghanistan, for example, are no longer
getting weekly iron and folic acid supplements due to a ban on attending high
school. While in sub-Saharan Africa, many maternal nutrition programs have been
knocked off course due to the pandemic, followed by rising food and fuel prices.
Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan will face a single opponent in May's
presidential election after opposition parties agreed on a joint candidate.
Kemal Kılıçdoru, the veteran leader of the secular Republican People's Party,
has promised an opposition alliance that would govern Turkey through consensus
and consultation. World News from the BBC. President Volodymyr Zelensky has said
he's instructed Ukraine's military commanders to find the forces to boost the
defence of the besieged city of Bakhmut. Mrs Zelensky said his top generals had
unanimously advised against a withdrawal from Bakhmut, which Russian forces have
bombarded for months and now surround on three sides. James Lander reports from
Kyiv. President Zelensky said the fighting in eastern Ukraine was painful and
challenging. That's because Ukrainian soldiers are dying to protect a city that
largely lies in ruins. Independent analysts have suggested Ukraine might be
considering a limited withdrawal from eastern Bakhmut. But Mr Zelensky met
senior commanders and his office said they spoke in favour of continuing the
defensive operation and strengthening their positions in the city. He and they
know this battle is costing the lives of thousands of Russian soldiers, and they
hope their enemy will emerge substantially weaker, regardless of who ends up
controlling the city. Officials in the US state of Georgia have charged 23
people with domestic terrorism offences. Police in Atlanta say the suspects were
part of a coordinated group who attacked officers on Sunday. They were
protesting against a new police training centre which, they say, will degrade
police relations with minority communities and damage the environment. The
Nicaraguan authorities have closed down the country's largest business
association, COSEP. It's the latest organisation to be subjected to a crackdown
on opponents by the left-wing president, Daniel Ortega. Brazil's justice
minister and the country's tax department have opened two investigations into
the former president Jair Bolsonaro, after media reports alleged that he tried
to hide illegally imported jewellery worth more than $3 million. The collections
were given to the Mr Bolsonaro and his wife during an official trip to Saudi
Arabia back in 2021. Mr Bolsonaro says he's being hounded over gifts that he
neither wanted nor received. BBC News. Hello, you're listening to the Newsroom
from the BBC World Service with me, Charlotte Gallagher. A major search is
underway in Mexico for four US citizens who've been kidnapped by gunmen. They
were taken after crossing the border and being shot at. The FBI has offered a
$50,000 reward for their safe return and the arrest of the gang. Mexico's
President Andres Manuel López Obrador says the Americans got caught up in a
fight between rival gangs in the city of Matamoros. They're United States
citizens, but according to the information we have, crossed the border to shop
for medication in Mexico. There was a confrontation between groups and they were
detained. We got more details from our correspondent in Mexico, Will Grant. Mr
López Obrador there gave a little more information than the Americans wanted to,
particularly regarding this idea that the group had crossed in search of buying
cheaper medication available in Mexico, cheaper than you can find in the US.
Quite costly, for people who live in US border states to dip into Mexico, buy
cheaper prescription drugs there. But Matamoros isn't a city where that's very
advisable. It's always dangerous and currently in the grip of kind of fighting
between two splinter groups from the Gulf cartel. So if it is the case that they
were caught up in the middle of this, it is a very, very worrying period for
their families and of course for the US government. Authorities in this country
and in the United States, the US embassy here is saying that it is their key
duty, their main priority to keep US citizens safe. And presumably there's a
huge search now going on for these people and the people that took them. Yes,
they were apparently traveling in a minivan, a minibus with license plates from
North Carolina. That's obviously been left at the scene that they were abducted
from. And they were seen as that they were abducted from. And now it's a
question of trying to track down leads. There is a combination of the FBI,
Mexican federal forces, Mexican state forces in the state of Tamaulipas,
theoretically working hand in hand. Now, those relationships aren't always as
smooth as they should be or as each of those agencies might like. But when it
comes to something like this, it will be quite honestly the priority in terms of
bilateral relationship while this is going on. There is really no other issue
that the US ambassador will be bothered about until this is resolved. It does
sort of set the tone for the relationship. And I think that the Mexicans will be
doing everything they can to send people door to door and track down leads on
where these people might be. And you mentioned that people regularly cross the
border from the US into Mexico. Do you think this sort of thing, it's so high
profile will put people off traveling to Mexico? One would think to traveling to
Matamoros, it probably would. Yes. And Tamaulipas in general is a very, very
dangerous state. Now, people do the same journey from, say, San Diego into
Tijuana very regularly. And there are other border crossings where it's
relatively common. People move backwards and forwards all the time, every day.
Some people live one side of the border and work the other. These are porous
borders. It's just that Matamoros is especially dangerous. And let's not lose
sight in the middle of all this, that the current immigration policy suggests
that all those who fail to make it into the United States for coming in on the
wrong paperwork or not having the paperwork will be made to wait in these
cities. And their claim is that it's too dangerous for them. I think this
underlines that these are extremely dangerous border cities all along Mexico's
northern border. That was Will Grant. To Ukraine now, where one of the fiercest
battles of the war is continuing for control of Bakhmut. The besieged eastern
Ukrainian city has become a focal point for Russian commanders who've struggled
to deliver any military victories in coming months. President Zelensky says he's
told military commanders to find the forces to boost Bakhmut's defences. I told
the commander-in-chief to find the appropriate forces to help our troops in
Bakhmut. There is no part of Ukraine about which one can say that it can be
abandoned. There is no Ukrainian trench in which the resilience and heroism of
our warriors would be disregarded. The occupier kills for the very fact that we
are Ukrainians. Rumours of the imminent fall of Bakhmut have been growing louder
by the day as the Russian paramilitary group Wagner has sent waves of men into
the fight. But Wagner have also complained of not having enough ammunition. And
there are reports of Russians armed only with shovels. So what's happening
there? Yaroslav Troimov is the Wall Street Journal's chief international affairs
correspondent and he's just got back from the front line. The city of Bakhmut,
which is a small city of only 70,000 people before the war began, has really
been the focal point of fighting in eastern Ukraine for the last several months.
And that's where Wagner, the Russian paramilitary organisation, has been really
trying to push through Ukrainian defences. And it is the only place along the
entire front line where Russia has managed to advance since last summer. So
Wagner has been able to seize about 40% of the area of Bakhmut as of now. They
are now in control of the entire eastern bank of the Bakhmutivka river that runs
through the city. And the Ukrainian forces there are in a very difficult
position because the remaining two paved roads into Bakhmut are under artillery
control by Wagner, which means that any movement there is extremely dangerous.
And so all the resupply and evacuations have to go through dirt roads. And this
time of the year, obviously the soil is wet and nearly impassable for wheeled
vehicles. I spoke to a couple of Wagner soldiers, former prisoners, recruited in
the prison camps, who were captured in the last few days. One of them told me
they had one weapon for the three of them sometimes. They're not giving rations.
But they are sent forward with entrenching tools. And what they do is they dig
the trenches for the next wave to come in, even if everybody in the first wave
is killed. And the small groups of five, six people advance, then they put in
machine gun positions, and then the next wave can come in and move ahead. The
Ukrainians don't have as much ammunition as Russians do. In trying to regain
land, the Ukrainians cannot afford the same tactic because the Ukrainians do
care about the lives of the soldiers, and they just cannot send them to certain
death the way Wagner does. Russian artillery has been pounding Bakhmut since
July. So there is hardly any buildings left in the center of the city or pretty
much anywhere else in the city that are intact. Most of the population has long
fled, and it's pretty a hellscape. That was Yaroslav Trofimov. The UN says the
number of pregnant women and girls who are suffering from malnutrition has
soared by 25% in the last two years in fragile countries such as Somalia,
Ethiopia and Afghanistan. The agency has blamed COVID-19, wars and new Taliban
policies in Afghanistan. Here's our global health correspondent Naomi Grimley.
UNICEF estimates that around a billion adolescent girls and women across the
world are malnourished. So this might mean that they're underweight, have anemia
or stunted growth. The agency is worried that the various crises around the
world in the past two years from war to COVID-19 have made it increasingly hard
for women and girls to get the food they need. So girls in Afghanistan, for
example, are no longer getting weekly iron and folic acid supplements due to a
ban on attending high school. In sub-Saharan Africa, many maternal nutrition
programs have been knocked off course because of the pandemic and then rising
food and fuel prices. So UNICEF says these trends could continue unless urgent
action is taken and it's calling on countries like the UK to provide extra
funding to tackle this nutrition crisis. That was Naomi Grimley. You're
listening to the BBC World Service and a reminder of our main story. Mexico's
president says his whole government is working to secure the release of four
kidnapped US citizens. South Korean K-pop has taken the world by storm but have
you ever heard of J-pop? Like the name would suggest, it's Japanese pop music.
Here's a sample. But there is a darker side. A new BBC documentary is now
examining the legacy of the Japanese music executive Johnny Kitagawa. He founded
a male-only talent agency which has produced many of Japan's biggest boy bands.
However, multiple allegations of sexual abuse have been made by boys and men who
once worked with him and aspired to make it in the Japanese pop market. Mabin
Azar told me more about the programme. The documentary tells the story of a man
called Johnny Kitagawa. Now he was the architect of J-pop. So J-pop is Japanese
pop and what many people might know as idol culture. I mean, he essentially
invented it and he founded a company called Johnny and Associates in the 60s and
that came to entirely dominate the market of J-pop. So the company is like a boy
band factory actually. So it produces hit after hit and then a lot of the boys
in these bands go on to get these very lucrative sponsorship deals. You can see
their faces on billboards all over Tokyo. They'll be advertising everything from
real estate to coffee to mobile phones. But there's a much darker side to this
story because we heard that Johnny Kitagawa used to use his male-only talent
agency to abuse boys who at the time were in their early teens. He had a massive
level of control over their careers. They were vulnerable. So one man who spoke
to me anonymously said that some of the other boys told him, you have to put up
with it if you want to succeed. And did anyone complain at the time? Well, they
did. But the thing that's really unusual about this is not only did people
complain, but actually the claim that Johnny Kitagawa was abusing boys in his
agency was actually upheld during a libel case in a Japanese court all the way
back in 2003. So back then, Outspoken magazine ran an investigation where
multiple former agency members came forward. And yet this wasn't really picked
up anywhere else in Japan. And in fact, Johnny Kitagawa continued to have this
kind of national treasure status all the way up to his death in 2019. In fact,
he's so revered in Japan, even today, that when I asked someone in the streets
of Tokyo, this man said, well, he is God. And why is this not been reported in
Japan then? Well, it's hard to know for sure. But what I got a really clear
sense of is that Johnny and Associates has a lot of influence over the
broadcasters of magazines and across the media. If you upset them, for instance,
by criticizing Johnny Kitagawa, they could stop offering you access to their
bands. So the boy bands who are called Johnny's or Johnny's Boys appear on
around 40 TV shows a week. They're a massive part of Japanese culture. And when
I was making documentary, I contacted music producers, entertainment reporters,
journalists from newspapers, and even the public broadcaster. And none of them
would speak to me about the story. And you contacted Johnny and Associates,
didn't you? I did. In fact, I made multiple attempts to contact the company,
Johnny and Associates. I asked for an interview. In one phone call, I was just
told it wasn't company policy for anyone to do interviews. Since the allegations
are obviously so serious, and since the company is so well respected in Japan, I
really wanted to speak to someone senior. I tried all the formal routes, and
eventually I gave up on those and I went to the company headquarters directly.
How did that go? Well, the head of global marketing, who was someone that I'd
had email correspondence with, and I'd spoken to on the phone, who'd previously
said the only response that they'd really give is that they didn't have a
comment, reiterated this. After that, though, I did hear from the company's CEO.
She's called Judy Fujishima, and she said the company is working to establish
highly transparent organisational structures, adapting to the times in
compliance with laws, regulations, and strengthened governance with impartial
experts. That was Mobin Azar. Legal experts have criticised the UN for the delay
in delivering aid to Syrian victims of last month's devastating earthquake. They
say the UN didn't need to wait for permission from the Syrian government and
could have applied a broader interpretation of international law. Junaid Boulos
reports. The UN says it's crucial to try to rescue victims within 72 hours, but
it took a week before Syria's president allowed aid to enter to the northwest of
Syria, held by opposition forces where more than 4,500 people died. The UN said
it needed permission from the Syrian government or the UN Security Council to
enter the area. But the BBC has spoken to more than a dozen legal experts, who
said that deaths could have been prevented if the UN had used a different
interpretation of international law, which would have allowed it to respond
quicker. Andrew Gilmour, a former senior UN official, said if the law says you
can't provide milk powder to a starving baby because it's across an
international border, then it should be ignored. A UN spokesman said
international laws had not delayed its response to the earthquake. Junaid
Boulos. France faces a further day of disruption in transport and public
services as unions continue their protest against President Macron's plans to
push back the pension age from 62 to 64. Most train and metro services have been
cancelled and many schools will be closed. Hugh Schofield reports. This is the
sixth day of strikes and protests since mid-January and unions say it'll be the
biggest one yet, with more than a million people turning out, they hope, for
demonstrations in Paris and other cities. With the government showing no sign of
backing down on its pension plan, the talk is of escalation, of bringing the
country to its knees in the words of one union leader, and in the days ahead
there'll be calls to extend the strikes in key sectors like power generation and
gas terminals. So far, for all the noise and sporadic disruption, the campaign
has caused little damage to the economy and in the meantime, the bill is
proceeding through Parliament. Unions and the left know that time is running out
before the reform becomes a fait accompli, which is all the more reason for them
to up the pressure now. Hugh Schofield. Let's get some sport now with Andy
Barwell. And we've got UEFA Champions League football action today. We'll also
discover the first two sides through to this season's quarter finals. Now
Borussia Dortmund take a slender 1-0 advantage to Chelsea for the return leg of
their round of 16 clash, but if they're to overturn that deficit, well Chelsea
will have to score twice in a match for the first time since late December and
make it back-to-back victories for the first time since October. But boss Graham
Potter feels they can do it. It's a big game, it's an exciting game. A chance to
go through to the last day of the Champions League. So a special night at
Stamford Bridge. So we're really looking forward to that. All our thoughts on
trying to be positive and trying to go through. Also looking for a spot in the
Champions League quarter finals, Benfica 2-0 up going into the home leg return
against Club Bruges. Now Paris Saint-Germain's Brazilian star Neymar is out for
a considerable length of time the rest of the season. Could he have played his
last game for PSG because he needs surgery to sort out an ankle problem, the
BBC's Maz Faruqi reports. It's been a bit of a miserable time for Neymar, hasn't
it? Brazil of course didn't have a great Qatar World Cup and then his return to
PSG picked up a serious ankle sprain on February the 20th, the latest of what
the club describe as several episodes of instability in his right ankle in
recent years. And following this medical staff, the club continue recommended a
ligament repair operation to avoid a major risk of recurrence. That surgery is
expected to take place in Doha. PSG confirm it will then be three to four months
until he returns to training Neymar. Brentford extended their unbeaten English
Premier League run to 12 games after defeating their West London rivals Fulham
by three goals to two. Osasuna are three points off the top six in Spain's La
Liga after they were held to a goalless draw by Celta Vigo. And finally news of
basketball from the United States, the NBA, where Donovan Mitchell poured in 40
points for the Cleveland Cavaliers who sent the Boston Celtics spinning to a
third straight defeat, this time 118 to 114 after overtime in a heavyweight
clash as those Eastern Conference rivals. Thanks Andy, that was Andy Barwell.
Just a couple of weeks ago the family of Bruce Willis announced the actor had
been diagnosed with dementia at the age of just 67. But now his wife Emma
Hemmings Willis has been forced to plead with paparazzi photographers in Los
Angeles to leave him alone. This one is going out to the photographers and the
video people that are trying to get those exclusives of my husband out and
about. Just keep your space. I know this is your job, but maybe just keep your
space for the video people. Please don't be yelling at my husband, asking him
how he's doing or whatever the woohooing and the yippee-ki-yays. Just don't do
it, okay? I've been speaking to our correspondent in LA, Peter Bowes. Well she
has a quite simple message. She's saying back off and show some understanding of
the position her husband is in. And she explains, she says, if you're someone
who's looking after someone with dementia, you know how difficult and stressful
it can be to get them out in the world and to navigate them safely. And she says
it's clear that a lot of education is needed. She says photographers and video
people that are trying to get these exclusives of her husband, as we've just
heard, keep your space. And she says her goal is to raise awareness around
dementia. Is it surprising she's having to do this? All photographers there, do
they have free reign to do what they want? I mean you think shouting at someone
with dementia, nobody would do that. Well the paparazzi, paparazzi photographers
are allowed to take photographs of anyone they like in a public space in Los
Angeles and indeed much of this country. The law tightens of course when
photographers trespass onto private property. But she is clearly referring to
something that happened in public outside a coffee shop. Is it surprising that
she feels that she has to say this? Well probably not, because I think some
would say it's simply a sad reflection on the lack of understanding by the
paparazzi in this case about the impact of all of the shouting that it could
have on her husband, who has clearly been, I think it's fair to say, a magnet
for the paparazzi for much of his life. There's nothing new there. But now he's
in a very different place. Someone with this kind of dementia which affects the
part of the brain that's associated with language. They are very much more
likely to be upset by a stressful situation like this than someone who is
entirely healthy. And she asks people in similar situations to send in any
advice on how to cope. And it's interesting in the comments to her post, many
people are praising her for her honesty and attempts to raise awareness of the
disease. That was Peter Bowes in Los Angeles. Finally, a Canadian brother and
sister born at 22 weeks have been certified as the world's most premature twins.
They were born 126 days early and spent six months in hospital. Andrew Ochiang
reports. Joy and celebrations greeted parents Shakina Rajendram and Kevin
Nadarajah when their twins were finally discharged from hospital six months ago.
Now Adia and Adria have celebrated their first birthday and Guinness World
Records has certified them as the world's most premature twins. It's rare for a
hospital to attempt to save a baby born this early. Shakina said that when she
began labor at just 21 weeks and five days, she feared the worst. But luckily,
the couple were able to move to Mount Sinai Hospital in Toronto, which has a
specialist neonatal intensive care unit. Even then, the timing had to be
perfect. At Mount Sinai Hospital, the team informed us that if the babies were
born that day, it would be a death sentence for the babies if they were born
before 22 because they did not have the capacities to resuscitate babies before
22 weeks either. I was experiencing a lot of bleeding and I didn't know if I
could hold the babies until they got to the 22 week and zero mark. But I knew
that I had to hold the babies in because if I didn't, they wouldn't be alive.
Amidst all that scenario of being told that the chance of survival is pretty
much zero percent, the chance of disability and that too significant disability
is really high. We were just clinging to our hope and faith, trusting in God. At
birth, the babies weighed less than 500 grams each and videos shared online
showed them tiny, frail and covered in bandages. They had other complications
and one of them needed more medical attention after the pair were discharged.
But they survived. Now their mother Shakina has a message for other parents
whose babies are admitted at neonatal intensive care units. I would say to other
parents going through the NICU journey, just being there, being present for your
babies makes a huge difference on the outcomes. Speak positive words to them,
tell them about how much you love them, tell them about all of the things you
hope and you dream for them. Be present for your babies, be brave to advocate,
to stand up for what your babies need. The parents also hope their record will
be broken and that their experience will promote a wider debate about how early
in pregnancy a hospital should try to save the life of a premature baby. That
was Andrew Ochieng. You've been listening to the Newsroom from the BBC World
Service with me, Charlotte Gallagher, and there's a News Bulletin next. This is
the BBC World Service, where Natasha Loder is examining the challenges we face
from long COVID. COVID's trail of destruction to human health is only gradually
becoming fully apparent. At first when I got COVID, I thought I'd be back after
10 days. Then it was a month, and I started to think three months. I'll be
hearing from scientists trying to unravel a condition with around 200 symptoms.
Long COVID is a health crisis. And finding out what the latest research on some
sufferers is showing. When we exercise participants and we walk them up and down
just for six minutes and we do blood tests at the end, their blood looks like
they've run the London Marathon. Depression, psychosis, sleep disturbances are
mostly reported by women. The long haul of long COVID. Today at 9.30 and 20 GMT.
The poet laureate of the United States, Ada Limon, has just received the most
inspiring and daunting prompt of her life. She's been asked by NASA, the
American Space Agency, to write a poem that will be sent into space. How can she
begin writing a poem that speaks of the fragile wonders of our home planet, that
expresses our hope there might be other life out there somewhere in the stars?
Join me, Maya Bosworth, for In the Studio with Ada Limon, after the news. BBC
News with Gareth Barlow. The Japanese Space Agency has said the launch of its
new rocket has failed after the second stage engine didn't ignite. It's the
latest setback for the H3, Japan's new first medium lift rocket for three
decades. The Mexican President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador has said his
government is working with the United States to secure the release of four
Americans kidnapped in the northern city of Matamoros. Mr. Lopez Obrador said
the US citizens have been caught up in a gun battle between rival criminal
groups. The UN Children's Agency UNICEF estimates that more than a billion women
and adolescent girls across the world are malnourished. It says crises from war
to COVID-19 have made it increasingly hard for them to get food. The Nicaraguan
authorities have closed down the country's largest business association, COSEP.
Once a supporter of the left-wing President Daniel Ortega, COSEP is the latest
organisation to be subjected to a crackdown on opponents. The defence ministry
in Peru says six soldiers are now known to have drowned during a confrontation
with anti-government protesters in the city of Ilave. It said the men had been
swept away on Sunday while trying to cross a river to avoid hundreds of
demonstrators. The British government is set to introduce new legislation later
today to deny any possibility of asylum and eventual citizenship to those
migrants who use small boats to get to the country. The BBC understands that
anyone using them to make the short journey from France will be deported
promptly. And the Australian Transport Safety Bureau has released an initial
report into the deadly crash between two helicopters near a theme park in
January. It blamed a breakdown in communication between the pilots. Four people
were killed and six others received serious injuries in the accident on the Gold
Coast in Queensland. That's the latest world news from the BBC. I'm sitting here
on W.S. Merwin's lanai in his home in Haiku, Maui. I'm in his palm forest. It's
the morning and there's a breeze that's moving all the palm thorns. The birds
are like birds of prey. The birds are loud and the wind keeps coming up. This is
the poet Ada Limon, having a well-deserved moment of rest during a writer's
residency in Hawaii. It's been a busy few months. In July 2022, she was
announced as the 24th poet laureate of the United States. This deep
concentration and the amount of research that's been done on her composition and
the amount of reading I'm doing has really allowed me to compose, for which I'm
grateful. This opportunity to rest, read and write has come at a good moment.
She's just been given a unique commission. She's been asked to write a poem that
will be sent into space. There is a spacecraft called the Clipper, which is
going to the second moon of Jupiter. And the second moon of Jupiter is a sister
water planet. NASA is sending the spacecraft up and they wanted something to be
on it that's like a message. It's maybe the most incredible prompt I've ever
received, you know. We'd like to continue NASA's legacy of sending messages
beyond the Earth. As we thought about who might author such a message, it seemed
perfect to ask the poet laureate to send a poem to communicate the sense of
wonder of exploration of another water world. Welcome to In the Studio from the
BBC World Service, the series that takes you inside the creative process of some
of the world's leading artists. I'm Maya Bosworth and over the past few months,
I've had the pleasure of talking with Ada Limon in depth as she goes about
crafting a poem for NASA. Hello, how are you? How nice to see you. Hello. Hello,
hello. I love your red microphone. Oh, thank you. It's very jolly. It is. The
first time Ada and I meet on a video call, I feel like I'm meeting an old
friend. I will say that I've got my dog with me and hopefully she won't snore. I
think Ada probably has this effect on a lot of people who've read her poetry.
She has that magical and generous skill of making you feel that a poem was
written for you, that she has somehow seen into your most privately held
feelings and expressed something tender that you didn't yourself have words for.
Reader, I want to say, don't die. Even when silvery fish after fish comes back
belly up and the country plummets into a crepitating crater of hatred, isn't
there still something singing? The truth is, I don't know. But sometimes I swear
I hear it, the wound closing like a forest overgrown. When I read her poems, I
feel that she's right beside me, sometimes sharing in hurt or grief, sometimes
pointing at the tree outside the window, saying, look, isn't that beautiful? The
leaves come, patient, plodding, the green skin growing over whatever winter did
to us, a return to the strange idea of continuous living. By paying close
attention to the experience of the everyday and the world around us, she draws
us closer together. For me, she's a poet of communion, so when I heard she'd
been appointed to what must be one of the world's biggest public roles for a
poet, it came as no surprise. Please join me in welcoming to our stage the 24th
Poet Laureate, Consultant in Poetry, our US Poet Laureate, Ada Lamont. For me,
even when she's writing about suffering, Ada is a poet of hope. She can sit with
the most painful things we in our planet are living through and allow us to feel
it all holding us in her lines. At her opening reading as Poet Laureate, she
read poems from across her six books of poetry. This is a poem that ends the
collection Bright Dead Things, and I think of it as an apocalyptic love poem,
which seems kind of useful today. The Conditional Say tomorrow doesn't come Say
the moon becomes an icy pit Say the sweet gum tree is petrified Say the sun's a
foul black tire fire Say the owl's eyes are pinpricks Say the raccoon's a hot
tar stain Say the shirt's plastic ditch litter Say the kitchen's a cow's corpse
Say we never get to see it Bright future, stuck like a bum star Never coming
close, never dazzling Say we never meet her, never him Say we spend our last
moments staring at each other Hands knotted together, clutching the dog Watching
the sky burn Say it doesn't matter Say that would be enough Say you'd still want
this Us, alive, right here, feeling lucky. The Poet Laureate is selected by the
United States Library of Congress, the biggest library in the world. The
Laureate's official task is to raise the national consciousness to a greater
appreciation of the reading and writing of poetry. Each Laureate brings their
own emphasis to the role. Joseph Brodsky brought poetry into public spaces like
airports and supermarkets. Rita Dove championed poetry for children. Joy Harjo,
the first Native American poet to hold the position, celebrated the work of
contemporary Native poets. It's November 2022, four months since Ada was
appointed Poet Laureate. When we catch up, I ask her how she's finding the role.
One of the things that's so interesting about it is that it is, you know, a
public role for poetry, but it's not just about the person's poetry. It's about
how I can advocate for poetry itself and elevate poetry to a wider audience. And
that's really been incredible because I think sometimes we have this idea that
poetry is a lost art or poetry is something that existed in the past. You know,
we think of Keats or Yeats and we don't think of people writing today. And I
think that the Poet Laureate itself in that position elevates that for everyone
to recognize that there are living, breathing poets and artists walking among us
and that new poems are being made every day. And that poetry feels very
necessary right now. It does. Maybe every age feels that they're living the end
of days, turbulent times. But it has felt, I think for many of us, the last few
years have been particularly turbulent, particularly difficult, particularly
divided. What for you does it mean to be a kind of ambassador for poetry in
times like these? Yeah, I mean, I think you're not wrong. I think that this does
feel like a very unique time in our lives. And it has felt precarious and
particularly turbulent. One of the things that I've noticed just in myself and
among my small circle of friends is that a lot of us have kind of had to numb
ourselves to kind of go through the world, right? To be like, oh yeah, let's not
think about that or let's try to compartmentalize in order to get through the
day, especially in the heart of the pandemic and going through lockdown and
watching so many people suffer. And I think that what poetry can remind us and
can do is to remind us that we are feeling people. That we have feelings. It can
also allow us to feel joy again and to feel reconnected. And I think that when I
read people's poetry, I'm often immediately moved by how much the human
experience is something that's happening in tandem. I would like to be able to
be writing in these next two years because creating poems helps me live. It
helps me feel grounded. It helps me connect to the world in a way that feels
essential to my well-being and to my wholeness. It's now December 2022. After a
very busy and happy few months of work and travel in her new role, Ada gets a
chance to spend some time focusing on her writing. She's accepted an invitation
to Hawaii for a two-week writer's residency. Her home for the fortnight is a
wooden house at the heart of a palm forest. The house is situated such that it
almost feels like, maybe the best way to describe it is like a tree house. You
are literally nestled, like the house is almost being held up by trees. This was
the home of a former US Poet Laureate, W.S. Merwin, who died in 2019. His home
is a little outside the town of Haiku, which is kind of poetic and beautiful.
How wonderful. Right? And he lived until he was 91. He used to have, you know,
on the different lanai, the different porches that are around the house, he
would befriend certain animals. He was a big animal lover and big lover of the
natural world. He would take blueberries and put them on the railing, and then
this cardinal would come and eat the blueberries. And apparently, you know, when
he passed away, that cardinal kept coming back looking for Merwin. Around the
house, Merwin and his wife planted over 3,000 palm trees to create a unique
19-acre forest of over 400 different species of palm. Writers are invited to
spend time here to read, reflect and write without interruption. I write
longhand in a blank notebook, and for some reason I can't do lines, a lined
notebook. It has to be blank. And I think it's because I write in lines. I'm a
poet that writes, you know, with lineation, because I'm already hearing it in
the rhythm of the poem itself. That doesn't mean that sometimes the lines
change, and sometimes, you know, I'll shift an enjambment or, you know, distress
a line more so that it kind of has a rougher sound. But I write in lines because
I'm also writing in breath. And then once I have a draft on the page, some kind
of seed, something, then oftentimes I will, when I'm ready, move it to the
computer or move it to, you know, typing it up and looking at it. And the reason
I don't do that right off the bat is that I always feel like there's something
about, like, once you type it, that it feels a little too done when maybe it's
not. And I can't tell you how many times poems have really shifted from the
handwritten page in the journal to the typing. There's something that happens in
that moment that feels important. You're translating yourself again, and you
have this second opportunity to readdress the breath, readdress the image, and
figure out if this is exactly, you know, how you want it on the page. It is day
four of my residency here in this home, in this poetic temple, if you will. And
I've written four poems, which is rare for me. One of the poems Ada has been
working on while in Maui is the commission for NASA, America's space agency. And
the first line is, there are still mysteries. And I keep trying to unravel that.
It came to me while I was meditating this morning, and I keep thinking, there
are still mysteries. We like to have everything figured out, don't we? But we
also like mysteries. We need them. I want to find out more about the mission
A.C.E. I want to find out more about the mission Ada is writing the poem for. I
get in touch with Dr. Robert Pappalardo, the project scientist for the Europa
Clipper mission. He's based in California, where the spacecraft is being built
at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. What is the Europa Clipper mission? Well,
Europa is a fascinating moon of Jupiter. It has a skin of ice, and we think that
there is a global scale ocean beneath that ice, about 20 kilometers beneath the
surface, we think is an ocean that may be something like 100 kilometers deep.
And on Earth, at least, everywhere there's water, there is life. Not necessarily
complex life. We're not expecting, you know, big squid or giant fish, but
instead, are there conditions that could support microbial life? How far away is
Europa and how long will this journey take? Europa, well, Jupiter, is five times
the distance from the sun that the Earth is. We're going to launch in October
2024 and fly by Mars about five months later. And then come back to Earth and
use the gravity first of Mars and then swinging back by Earth to slingshot out
to Jupiter. So that whole journey takes about five and a half years to get out
to Europa. What will happen to the poem physically? So we have a place on the
spacecraft that's kind of reserved for this purpose, and it will be etched
there. It will have a place of honor on the spacecraft and with us as we explore
Europa. I wanted to ask you whether you see any parallels between the sort of
craft of poetry and what you at NASA are engaged in in terms of exploration. Oh,
absolutely. To me, it's the natural connection between poetry and space
exploration. Poetry asks big questions. Space exploration asks big questions.
The ideas, the big ideas we're communicating are similar, and poetry can be a
natural way to communicate, to express what many scientists are trying to
express in the work we do. And to have a poet be able to make that connection
and in a way help us express it seems ideal. You're listening to In the Studio
from the BBC World Service. Following the American Poet Laureate Ada Limon, she
crafts a new poem that will be sent into space. Hello. Ada and I catch up again
when she gets back from her stay in Hawaii. I'm well, how are you doing? Yeah,
I'm really good, thank you. She was born in California in 1976. Home today is
Lexington, Kentucky. I'm on Hawaii time still, so I'm a little out of it. I'm
interested in how spending time in Maui has influenced the poem she's writing.
We, my husband and I, were able to really establish a routine in the home where
I'd get up and Merwin has a dojo inside of his house, and I would ring all the
bells, and then I would do some yoga and some meditation, and then I would write
for a few hours and read a little bit. And then, you know, because the home is
inside the 19-acre palm forest, it does get a little dark, and you know, you're
in Maui, and it's so beautiful. And so, of course, towards the afternoon we'd
break and go find the sun and go to the beach. And it was very interesting to be
in a place that is so earthbound and so like a celebration of what the earth can
do, and then also thinking about space because there is this level in which, in
order to think about that kind of exploration, there's also this level of
pointing back to the earth and the beauty and mystery of the earth itself. There
was one night I was there during the December 7th full moon, you know, and it's
a house that has no curtains because it's in the jungle, so why would it have
any curtains or anything? The moonlight on the palm trees, you know, and each
palm is different. You know, some of them have these sort of finger-like fronds
that move and dance, and some of them are all connected and sort of sway in a
different way, and there are different heights and different levels. And I
couldn't sleep, and I often can't on the full moon. I don't know about you, but
I just stayed awake and watched the moon on the palm trees. I don't think I'll
ever forget it because everything was sort of silvery and bright and moving. It
felt like you were part of something, right, that you were living in tandem with
it. It was impossible to feel like, oh, I'm separate from this. I wonder how
she's feeling about the brief from NASA. It's a big ask to speak for the whole
planet. Were there images that presented themselves right away? I think the
biggest thing for me was that water was very important. We're made of water. You
know, it's this incredible element that is so essential to our well-being and to
our survival. So I think I knew that was key. Does it feel daunting? Incredibly
daunting, incredibly daunting. And the people at NASA have been incredible, but,
you know, it needs to speak to kids as well as adults. It needs to speak to
certain aspects of Europa itself. So it's very surreal. So how far has she got
with writing it? I actually maybe have, I want to say 19 drafts. I think it's
90% done. I'm down to sort of two versions, which probably to a non-poet would
almost look identical. And yet to me, there's sort of a very minor difference
between the two and it's just sort of the opening. And whether or not I sort of
start right, right off the bat, or there's a little more of an entryway into the
poem. And so I'm hoping to make that decision between today and tomorrow so I
can, you know, send it to them and see what they think. Can I ask you about the
form of the poem? It's interesting that you ask about it because I think form is
essential to how a poem is written. And I generally start in forms. If it's a
sonnet, it begins as a sonnet. Very rarely do I move it from one thing to
another. I almost begin with a container on some ways. This poem in particular,
terses, was what immediately came to mind. If you think of the word stanza,
meaning room, if you walk into a room with three walls versus four, there's
something a little stranger happening. And so tersets, which is three lines,
always sort of present a little more of a strangeness. And that made sense to me
when we're dealing with the unknown aspect of space. It's now the middle of
January 2023. And I call Ada to find out how things are progressing. Good. It's
been busy, but good. Last time we were speaking, you'd written 19 drafts of this
poem and you'd whittled that down to two. And you were sort of weighing up some
final creative decisions about perspective and the kind of what you call the
doorway into the poem. Where are you at now? And have you landed on one approach
over the other? Yeah. When we talked about it, I revised that beginning. And now
it feels like, oh, this was exactly how we were supposed to enter the poem. It
had to begin with the human, with the idea of our relationship to space and to
the sort of the wonder and awe of looking out into the sky and how long we've
been doing that for. You think of Galileo, who actually named Europa, and how
much mystery there's always been when we look at the night sky. I remember when
I lived in New York City, you kind of forget about stars a little bit. And then
when I moved back out to California, I was on Moon Mountain, an actual place
called Moon Mountain. And I remember looking up at night and suddenly
remembering the stars. And it was like kind of gas. I had forgotten about them
in my 10 years in New York. Because you so rarely saw them on such a scale. The
poem needed to go back to those moments of gasping at the sky. Last time we
spoke, you were due to go and visit the Jet Propulsion Lab. Have you been? I
have been. Yay! What was it like? Yes, it was incredible being in the Jet
Propulsion Lab and seeing mission control where every Mars mission has taken
place. And to me, I think the fascinating thing is that exploration is a human
endeavor. And it's good to be reminded about the humanity behind these projects
to explore. And how many people are involved in making these things happen to
meet some of the humans behind the project. It was very inspirational. Have you
delivered the final draft? I have. I have delivered the final draft. We recorded
it in the NASA studios. They were very happy with it, which made me, of course,
thrilled. I needed to kind of take the pressure off on some level of thinking of
it as a public poem. And when you work on sort of shutting out all of the
expectations and then you get a complete draft that you are happy with, then
your other self needs to say, oh, now has it met the expectation? You know, is
it doing the thing that I've wanted to do and have set out to do as an artist?
And, you know, I think I have. I hope so. So I feel really good about it. And
how about NASA? How did the team there feel about the finished poem? Here's
Robert Pappalardo, project scientist. It is very special to have that union of
exploration and the natural world and the connection of our water world to
another water world and to see it expressed in such a beautiful way that I think
will connect with people around the world. It's emotional to me and I can't wait
for it to be revealed to the world. I can't wait either, but we do have to wait
a little longer. NASA will be making the poem public in June and after that
we'll be broadcasting an in the studio update so you can hear the poem in full.
Finally, I wanted to ask Ada what writing the poem has meant to her. Has she
learned anything new in the writing of it? For me, the reveal of it has a lot to
do with the fact that there's so much unknown about our Earth. And there are so
many wonders here. And that in that exploration, we are learning more and more
about how we work as human beings, how our planet works, the damage we've done
to our planet. And I think that was the reveal for me. Looking outward is
important, but looking inward and looking towards us and our planet and the
wonders here are essential to being able to love this world, to keep returning
to not just what's next, but what's here now. You've been listening to Ada Limon
speaking to me, Maya Bosworth, for In the Studio on the BBC World Service. If
you enjoyed today's programme, visit our website for more stories like this one
or subscribe to the In the Studio podcast. This is the BBC World Service On the
Road with the Health Wagon. Our mission statement is to provide quality care to
the medically uninsured here in the Appalachian Mountains. People are having to
choose between their medicine, food and a place to live. We do not bill anyone.
We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third
party services and platforms. And the BBC stream you are currently listening to
will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart
speaker and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're
listening on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.
Join me, Jolande Nel, as I try and persuade them to meet and discuss their
differences.