TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Questions at 10 past one with any answers at two o'clock here on Radio 4. BBC
News at one o'clock, this is Alan Smith. The UK and the European Union appear to
be on the brink of completing a new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. Events are
being held in County Tyrone in support of a police officer who is critically ill
after being shot last Wednesday. There are calls for a major transformation of
the way the UK produces its food, amid shortages of some fruit and vegetables.
The government and the European Union appear to be on the brink of finalising a
new deal on post-Brexit trading rules for Northern Ireland. A Downing Street
source has described negotiations as positive. The current agreement came into
force in 2021 but is controversial. It means Northern Ireland still follow some
EU laws and goods arriving from Great Britain as subject to checks. The
arrangement is also opposed by the Democratic Unionist Party, which is blocking
power-sharing at Stormont until changes are made. Our political correspondent
Ione Welles reports. The essence of a new deal between the UK and the EU over
trading arrangements for Northern Ireland is basically there. Discussions
between both sides are now focusing on its unveiling and presentation. The
government is briefing politicians and business stakeholders about it. Queen
Charles was also due to meet the president of the European Commission Ursula von
der Lion in the UK today. Downing Street and the Palace claim this was cancelled
due to operational reasons unrelated to the political talks. But her planned
visit to the UK indicates a deal was about to be publicly presented while she
was here. The Prime Minister has been trying to shore up support for it among
some critical Tory MPs and the Democratic Unionist Party. Critics argue it still
gives the EU some sovereignty over Northern Ireland's future trading rules. The
government knows this may be a case of giving everyone something they need if
you can't give anyone everything they want. But political battles with his own
MPs and the DUP could still lie ahead for Rishi Sunak. Events have taken place
in Northern Ireland in support of a police officer who's critically ill in
hospital after being shot earlier this week. Five people have been arrested in
connection with the attack on Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell in Oma on
Wednesday. Julian Fowler reports. John Caldwell was coaching an under 15
football team when he was shot and critically injured. Around a thousand people
gathered at his club, Bearer Swifts, to march in a show of solidarity for him
and his family. They were led by young people from the club, some of whom
witnessed the attack and were joined by members of sporting organisations from
across the community, including the local Gaelic Football Club. A rally was also
held in the centre of Oma, a town that is all too familiar with the violence of
the Troubles, 25 years after 29 people and unborn twins died in a dissident
Republican car bomb. This was a demonstration of unity by ordinary people
against the new IRA, who police believe carried out the shooting. A
demonstration that those who oppose the Good Friday peace agreement have little
public support and that the overwhelming majority do not want to see a return to
the violence of the past. The Deputy Chair of the Environment Agency has called
for a massive transformation to the way food is produced and distributed in the
UK. A number of supermarkets are limiting the sale of some fruit and vegetables
because of bad weather in Spain and Morocco. British producers say high energy
costs, combined with last year's drought, are affecting production. Our Business
Correspondent Esselkha reports. Community shelves in some supermarkets this week
have highlighted the vulnerabilities of the UK's food supply chain and prompted
some in the industry to call for change. Extreme weather affecting imports from
Spain and Morocco is a major factor in the shortages, but some UK growers have
also described putting off planting crops due to high energy costs and low
prices offered by supermarkets. Judith Batchelor, who's the Deputy Chair of the
Environment Agency, said it was time for risks like climate change to be built
into how our supply chains work. There is an unprecedented number of different
factors impacting the price of our food and that's not just here at home in the
UK, but we're part of a massive global food system that is extremely complicated
and interlinked. And I think we are seeing or facing into what needs to be a
massive transformation of the way that we produce, distribute and retail food.
The National Farmers Union has called for more support for the industry with
things like energy costs. Helen Browning, the Chief Executive of the Soil
Association, who's also a farmer, described the issues facing growers as deep
and severe. It's not just about this weather problem in other countries and the
energy problems here now, but we've had a number of shocks that have hit the
industry over the last few years and there's just not confidence that actually
they're going to get the return they need if they do start to invest and grow
more of what we need. The British Retail Consortium says supermarkets have long
established relationships with farmers and understand the need for prices to be
sustainable. The government has highlighted the resilience of the UK supply
chain and says current shortages should be resolved in the next few weeks. But
many of those growing fresh produce in the UK believe the challenges could
continue long beyond that. There are long queues at polling stations across
Nigeria where people are voting for a new president. The election is being seen
as one of the most unpredictable in recent years, with three leading candidates
instead of two. There have been reports that some polling stations failed to
open on time. Our West Africa correspondent Mayini Jones sent this report from
Lagos. It's a mixed picture across the country on election day. Getting 87
million people to cast their votes in just six hours is a mammoth challenge in
the best of environments. In polling stations in Lagos Island, voters told us
turnout was higher than usual, but in other parts of the country, the situation
is different. There are reports of late start and faulty accreditation machines
in some polling units, including in the capital Abuja. In other areas, voting
hasn't even started, despite the deadline for polls to close being just an hour
away. Whoever has chosen to be Nigeria's next president will have a myriad
challenges to tackle, including high unemployment, rising inflation and a dire
security situation. A meeting of finance ministers from the world's biggest
economies looks set to end without a closing statement because of differences
about the war in Ukraine. The summit of G20 delegates hosted by India has failed
to reach a consensus on condemning Russia's invasion. Now sport and Wales and
England meet this afternoon as Rugby Union's Six Nations resumes while Andy
Murray is one win away from his first ATP title in nearly four years. Here's
Nick Catton. Yes, the Six Nations resumes this weekend. Game of the Day is at
the Principality Stadium in Cardiff, as Wales host England. That match only
getting the go-ahead after Wales players called off their proposed strike in
midweek. Wales, looking for their first win of this year's competition, head
coach Orrin Gatlin says the rivalry between the two nations always generates a
special atmosphere. They've asked for the roof to be open, so the roof's open.
We would have preferred it to be enclosed. Whether that dampens down a little
bit of the atmosphere or not, I don't think that you can, with a game like this,
try and create anything out of nothing I own in the past. I may have said a
couple of things that have backfired on me. There'd be no sort of winding up the
opposition because I think this game takes care of itself. Well Ireland kick off
the day away to Italy. Joe Root says he owed his first century and eight tasks
to his England teammates. He's 153 and not out on day two of the second test
against New Zealand, helped England to 435 for eight declared before the host
slipped to 138 for seven. England's lead is 297. His route. Felt like a long
time since I contributed to this group and fell out. The lads have carried me a
little bit for a while, so it's my turn to chip in and I'm really glad I managed
to make the most of that. And football Arsenal can move five points clear at the
top of the Premier League for a few hours at least when they travel to face
Leicester City. The Arsenal manager Michael Arteta is keen to see his side
rebuild momentum after last week's win against Aston Villa. Every day is going
to be a race, a race how we convince those players today to train better, to
play better against Leicester because we're going to have to be really good to
beat them, especially the way they've been playing there the last few weeks.
Second place Manchester City are away at Bournemouth. There's a huge game in the
battle to avoid relegation as 19th place leads host bottom of the table,
Southampton, just one point separates the two sides. And Daniel Medvedev stands
between Andy Murray and the first ATP title since 2019, the pair meet in the
final of the Qatar Open later this afternoon. Nick Hatton. Anthony Albanese has
become the first Australian Prime Minister to march in Sydney's gay and lesbian
Mardi Gras. Thousands of people lined the streets for the city's annual
celebration from where our correspondent Phil Mercer sent this report. Live from
Taylor Square on Oxford Street in Sydney, it's the 45th Sydney Gay and Lesbian
Mardi Gras. Hundreds of thousands of spectators have gathered for Sydney's gay
and lesbian Mardi Gras. Anthony Albanese attended the parade before as an
opposition MP, but he's now made history. I'll also be the first Prime Minister
not to watch the march on Mardi Gras, but to march. Mr Albanese has joined
12,500 marchers at one of the world's largest LGBTQI events. He says his
government is committed to ending inequality based on sexuality or identity.
Sydney City Councilor Linda Scott says his appearance is a show of solidarity.
Doing this as the Prime Minister, this is of course a really wonderful thing to
see for gay and lesbian communities. Mardi Gras began as a civil rights march in
1978. It coincides with Sydney World Pride 2023, a global rights festival. The
Prime Minister's participation has though been criticized. Some Christian groups
insist Mr Albanese is pandering to a small minority that's hijacking Australia's
social agenda. The headlines again. The UK and European Union appear to be close
to agreeing a new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. Events are being held in
County Tyrone in support of a police officer who's critically ill after being
shot last Wednesday. There are calls for a major transformation of the way the
UK produces its food amid shortages of some fruit and vegetables. BBC News Read
by Alan Smith Nick Robinson's guest this afternoon is the housing campaigner,
Quajo Tuanaboa. He'll talk about his own experience of poor social housing, his
father's death and how he harnessed the power of social media to become a
powerful voice in Westminster. Political thinking is at 5.30. Any questions?
After this. The kick inside. And on the record's 45th anniversary we're
celebrating the icon that is Kate Bush. Six Musics deep dive into the kick
inside. You can find archive interviews and exclusive performances as well as
playlists and programmes featuring artists she's inspired. She was in her own
world that she had created herself. Way way ahead of their time. For all this
and more open BBC Sounds, click the music tab and scroll to find Kate Bush's
artist icons collection. Now on Radio 4 it's time for any questions. Here's Alex
Forsyth. Hello and welcome to St Andrews Church in Wivoliskin, a market town in
West Somerset that sits at the foot of the Brendan Hills on the south eastern
boundary of Exmoor. Wivy, as it's known, prides itself on its sense of
community. It has several volunteer networks to support its residents, including
a number of Ukrainians who've made this their home in the year since Russia's
invasion of their country, which we mark this weekend. This is a return visit
for any questions. We were last here in 1955, though I wasn't presenting it
then. This time on our panel we have James Heepee, the Armed Forces Minister and
the Conservative MP for Wells. Prior to politics, James was in the army,
reaching the rank of Major. He served in Afghanistan, Iraq and Northern Ireland.
Darren Jones is the Labour MP for Bristol Northwest and Chair of Parliament's
Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Committee. Before becoming an MP, he
studied human bioscience, then became a solicitor, specialising in technology
law. Mary Dejevsky is a columnist for The Independent and a former foreign
correspondent in Moscow, Paris and Washington. Mary has a degree in modern
languages from Oxford University and spent a year as a British Council exchange
student in the then USSR in the 1970s. And Isabel Oakshot is an author,
journalist and commentator who's currently a presenter and international editor
at the TV channel Talk TV. She's held senior editorial positions at the Sunday
Times and the Daily Mail and she describes herself as a scoop-getter and a
feather-ruffler. With a list, please welcome your any questions panel. And so
let's go to our first question. My name is Anastasia. One year ago I woke up to
the sound of my mother screaming. That's okay, please take your time. And the
news that my country was being invaded. After months of hiding in bomb shelters,
we fled from Severadanyec in eastern Ukraine and looked for safety.
Unfortunately this war might go on for a long time. For how much longer can the
UK give military support to the defenders of my country? Anastasia, thank you
for your question and thank you for sharing your experience with us. Thank you
very much. So Anastasia's question for how much longer can the UK give military
support to the defenders of her country? James Heepee. Well, it's been as long
as it takes and it's our honor to do so. To think that a year ago or just over a
year ago I was in Kiev visiting to do the original deal for anti-tank weapons to
let your government know that the UK was going to give those 6,000 N-Law
weapons. And to be honest with you Anastasia, at that point we thought we were
helping prepare for a resistance campaign. And the tenacity with which your
countrymen repelled that initial tack on Kiev was extraordinary. Emboldened an
international community to get behind you. And to think that a year on we're in
the business of giving you thousands of rounds of ammunition and anti-aircraft
defense and anti-tank missiles and tanks and artillery pieces and all sorts
besides all the time is yes, a fantastic reflection of the international
consensus that you must be supported. It's an amazing reflection of the
diplomatic skill of President Zelensky. But what it is more than anything else
is a reward for the incredible courage, bravery, determination and sacrifice of
the Ukrainian people. And yesterday afternoon I went down to Salisbury Plain
where there's a few hundred Ukrainians training one of four locations in the
country where they are at the moment. And we did an act of remembrance and it
was sobering, it's always sobering when you do an act of remembrance but what
was particularly sobering but also inspiring as I stood there and looked across
into the eyes of the young men that were lined up opposite. They're three weeks
into a five week training package. In two weeks time they will be in the Donbass
ready to give their lives in the defense of your country to recover your
freedom. And with Lava Ukrainian we will give them everything they need to get
the job done. James, thank you. Can I just ask you about a few specifics because
you will be aware of a very active debate that's going on at the moment about
whether or not the UK and other Western countries should specifically give jets
to Ukraine. Something that President Zelensky has asked for, you're the Armed
Forces Minister, will we? Well the more pressing ask is around artillery. That's
the thing that the Russians have now got so few armoured vehicles that they are
using large amounts of conscripts as dismounted infantry and the thing to really
repel those attacks is a big weight of artillery fire and that's the focus. We
also know that you must go on the offensive in order to recover some of your
land and disrupt Russian supply lines and so getting you the tanks and the
things that you need for that ground offensive are the priority. And then
finally the big announcement from the Prime Minister in Munich the weekend
before last is even longer range precision weapons which will make an enormous
difference. We've offered to train pilots, the Prime Minister hasn't ruled out
jets but frankly there are things that you need sooner and that's what we're
working hard to deliver soonest. James, thank you. Darren Jones. Well thank you
for asking your question. It's impossible for us to understand what you and your
family have been going through but I think all of us on the panel probably
reflect the mood of the British people that on a cross party basis this is not a
party political issue. We're all united on this in Westminster about providing
the support that Ukraine needs for as long as it needs it and that's not just
about the supply of military equipment, it's about the role that Britain can
play globally in making sure that we bring our allies with us so that we are
united in making it absolutely clear to Vladimir Putin and indeed to anybody
else around the world that these types of illegal invasions irrespective of the
rationale you give for saying it's legitimate are not acceptable in this world
and there will be consequences for those actions and we will not tire to ensure
that you will not get away with that. So I think on behalf of the British
people, probably the people in this room, all of us on this panel, all of us in
Westminster, we're there with you shoulder to shoulder and we'll be there as
long as we need to be. Darren, I appreciate what you said about this. This isn't
just military support but I want to ask you on the specifics that I put to James
as well about jets because that is a very active discussion, something that
President Zelensky has asked for, James makes the point that actually that's not
the priority. Do you think Labour would support giving jets to Ukraine? Well I
think what Labour supports is part of the discussion that's been happening in
government and elsewhere which is what type of military jets might be
appropriate. So I think there's a debate going on for example where Poland might
give the type of fighter jets that Ukrainian pilots are very used to using and
then countries like the UK and others can backfill into those countries with the
different types of jets that we have here. But that's also why the training is
important because if we do get to a situation in the future where the maybe
American made F-35s need to be used that you have pilots that are equipped and
skilled and able to use that kit that maybe they're not used to using in the
first instance. Darren, thank you. You were at the Ben Wallace, the defence
secretary, was talking on Friday morning about exactly that whether the UK could
effectively backfill Poland to supply jets to Ukraine. To Anastasia's question,
for how much longer can the UK give military support to the defenders of her
country, Isabel Oakeshot? Thank you for your question and anyone listening to
you can hear in your voice just how painful that is for you. And in a way I was
kind of glad that you did find it difficult to ask the question because I don't
want anyone in this country to stop remembering how very real this is. And I
think there is a real danger of some fatigue setting in. I agree absolutely with
James and Darren. We have got to be on your side for as long as it takes. But we
shouldn't be under any illusion that people will increasingly question the
resources that we are sending. We have to keep making the case that this isn't
just your war, it is all of our war. And there is no option but to keep going.
And if anything, we need to escalate what we're doing. And I have sensed a real
shift in just in the last few weeks in what the politicians are saying and what
they are prepared to contemplate. So at the beginning of the war I was on the
Polish border with Ukraine and at that time there was a lot of pressure within
Poland for jets and everybody in the West was saying no, no, no, we're not going
to do that. That is definitely shifting. So I think there is plenty to be
optimistic about. We're going to keep there until it's done. When you say
escalate, do you mean escalate military support and what about therefore then
the risk of escalation? And that's always the question, isn't it? It's the
easiest thing in the world to say, well, we can't do that because that could
lead to World War III. You don't counter a bully by capitulating. We're already
in a very dangerous situation. We've got to double down. Isabel, thank you. Just
a bit of context here. Since Russia invaded Ukraine in February last year, the
UK spent 2.3 billion pounds on military assistance. It's the second biggest
donor behind the US and it is set to spend the same again next year. Mary
Jiefsky. Well, I too have immense sympathy for Anastasia and I understand
because I have family in laws who are in Ukraine and from Ukraine. I am under
absolutely no illusions about the state of the war, the immense cruelty and
hardship, the barbarity of what's happening now, especially on the Eastern
Front. But I have to say that I'm one of those very few people, I have to say,
who questions how long the support from this country or from Europe or from the
United States can realistically continue. And that's for two reasons. The first
is an entirely selfish reason and it's by far the smaller reason, which is that
some Western countries' defence stocks are actually being depleted and we're not
replenishing them anything like enough, not just to supply ourselves if we
needed to defend our countries, but to support Ukraine because the pace at which
ammunition, for instance, is being used is faster than it's being produced in
those Western countries that produce it. So that's the first reason and as I
say, the smaller reason. The bigger reason is that by sending weapons, ever more
powerful weapons to Ukraine for, as my fellow panellists have said, as long as
it takes, we are continuing this war and this suffering for people like
Anastasia and her family. We are responsible for continuing this war by
supplying ever more powerful weapons to continue it. OK, James Leipour, your
thoughts on that. On those two points, please. Firstly, on this idea, because it
has been suggested that the UK could run low, for example, of ammunition by
supplying Ukraine, but the broader point Mary makes. Well, so on the ammunition
side, it is undoubtedly true that we are taking risk against our own stockpiles
to do what needs to be done to support Ukraine. Now that triggers the need to
quickly get the contracts out to not only recover what we've given, but also to
grow the stockpiles back to what they need to be given. The threat of war in
Europe has been realised over the last 12 months. But it's also important to
note that as I sort of go around the world, I sort of jokingly say I'm currently
the world's second biggest arms smuggler after my US counterpart. I'm
commissioning manufacturing capacity all over the world. It's not just in the UK
that we are manufacturing and sourcing manufacturing to replenish UK supplies or
for Ukraine. So I go around the world finding what I can to give to Ukraine. And
of course, we give stuff from our own stockpiles to as for the point that's made
about that. We are continuing the war. I think that that is true, but we're
continuing the war in order that the war ends on terms that are acceptable to
President Zelensky. Because to not would be to accept that a very significant
proportion of the Ukrainian population are left in occupied territory being
brutalised by the Russian army. And therefore we have to continue the war and
support Ukraine until every inch of Ukraine is liberated and the Ukrainian
people are created. What is the point, Isabella? What is the outcome? What's the
strategy that we're going for then? If there's an indefinite continuation. I
want to just reinforce the point that James made there. Because Mary, I mean,
the reality is that you're saying we're just carrying on the war. The
alternative is simply to allow President Putin to win this war. You know, we've
got to be realistic. Ukraine is not going to win it on its own. And he's not
going to stop there. It's the destruction of Ukrainian towns and cities and the
deaths of thousands upon thousands more young Ukrainians. But that's just a
complete capitulation. I mean, you could say that if any country illegally
invaded another. Oh, well, let's just give in so that less people die. OK, Mary,
I just want to get your thoughts on the point that if the solution isn't
continuing in the way that the other panelists have suggested, what is the
alternative? The alternative is to get around a table and as soon as possible.
And sorry, but implicit in that, Mary, is that you would expect a Ukrainian
territorial compromise. It's very hard for me to see how the Ukrainian official
position currently, which is that it wants to restore its borders as they were
at the collapse of the Soviet Union, which includes the recapture of Crimea, how
that is realistic. And as if even if it's only a transitional measure, there is
likely to have to be some sort of territorial compromise. That is for the sake
of the survival of Ukraine and its population. It's not capitulation. Sam and
Jones, your thought on that point. Mary is speaking on behalf of the Ukrainian
people and the leadership of Ukraine. Actually when President Zelensky came to
Westminster only a week or so ago, he made it very clear that he was not and the
Ukrainian people were not willing to accept the outcome that Mary dictates. It's
for the Ukrainian people to decide what happens in Ukraine. The actions that we
are taking are not offensive, they are defensive, not just because it's the
right thing to do, but because the world has to make it very clear that these
actions will not be accepted by President Putin or anybody else in the world
that thinks that this type of behaviour is acceptable in a modern world. Mary?
Obviously, Ukraine has to have something akin to a casting vote in what happens.
But Ukraine is not the only voice here. Everybody says very idealistically,
Ukraine, it must be Ukraine that decides. But Ukraine is dependent for its
defence on Western countries. It's dependent on the United States. It's
dependent on the UK. It's dependent on European countries who are providing its
defence. Without that, it could not be defending itself. And so we have a voice
in this too. Mary, thank you. Final thought, James, on that point? That Ukraine
is dependent on Western countries for its support? I disagree profoundly. We
cannot unsee what we have seen in Booker and Appin and thousands of other
Ukrainian towns and villages, and we cannot accept an outcome that resigns
Ukrainian women, children, Ukrainian population at large to that sort of
brutalisation. We must stick with the Ukrainians for as long as it takes. So
this ends on President Zelensky's terms and President Zelensky's terms only.
Thank you. An important discussion particularly, of course, on this weekend. I
just want to say, Anastasia, thank you very much for asking your question. Thank
you for asking. Of our panel. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. If you want to
have your say on this, if you have an opinion on anything that you've heard from
our panellists, then Anita Arnhem will be there to take your call and hear your
thoughts on any answers. Saturday lunchtime, lines open at 12.30pm. The number
you need is 03700 100 444. Now, onto our next switch comes from Gabrielle Smy.
Hello. I'm asking this question as a Homes for Ukraine host. The Homes for
Ukraine scheme enables us to offer refuge to Ukrainians in a vital and dignified
manner. Why aren't we offering the same help to refugees from other parts of the
world? Thanks for your question. So you've taken somebody in from Ukraine into
your home, is that right? So you've taken someone from Ukraine into your home?
Yes, they've actually just moved out. We had a family with us for eight months.
And how was that? Well, it was just a fantastic way to be able to help people
who really needed help. Thank you very much for your question. Which was the
Homes for Ukraine scheme enables us to offer refuge to Ukrainians in a vital and
dignified manner. Why aren't we offering the same help to refugees from other
parts of the world? Isabella Oakeshot. Well, the asylum system, as it is, is a
complete and utter disgrace. It is a mess. It is a complete nonsense to be
spending hundreds of millions of pounds putting people up in hotels. But that's
not refugees that are coming here through the Ukrainian system, is it? Also, why
not extend those schemes so that people aren't? The question wasn't about the
Ukrainians, which I fully support the homes for Ukrainians because they're
genuinely fleeing war zones. What we need to do is rapidly get on top of the
backlog. We shouldn't be looking at how to house people who may not have a
legitimate claim to be here long term. We need to weed out those people who
genuinely need and deserve our help from those who are economic opportunists.
And those who do not have a legitimate claim to be here need to be sent home
quickly. So how do you do that then? How do you, to use your words, weed out?
Well, what you don't do is spend weeks and weeks, and in fact, years, sitting on
claims. You put the resources in that it takes to quickly process the claims.
And I don't think that fast tracking 12,000 people by asking them to fill in a
paper questionnaire in which they are invited to tick a box saying that they
have or haven't ever had any criminal record or committed any acts of terrorism.
It's up to them to just declare that. I don't think the way to process it is
that approach, frankly. And then allow those people to come in when we don't
really know who they are. And by the way, bring their families too. So you're
referring there just for context for people that perhaps might not have followed
this. And this is some 12,000 asylum seekers from Afghanistan, Eritrea, Libya,
Syria, and Yemen are going to fill in a questionnaire instead of a face-to-face
interview to help the government in its aim to get down the asylum backlog that
you referred to, Isabel, which at the moment sits at about 166,000 people. The
question was, why not offer similar schemes like the Holmes for Ukraine scheme
to refer to you from other parts of the world? Darren Jones, should we be? I
think there's a deeper problem than just capacity in Whitehall here. I mean, my
worry is that whether it's in the UK or previously in the United States or in
parts of Europe, how we treat refugees has become a political football for those
who see populism and division as the way to try to win elections. And I
genuinely believe that the vast majority of the British people look at it and
are horrified because we as a people want a fair and just system. Of course
there should be proper checks. Of course there should be proper balances. Of
course where people are abusing the system they should not be permitted to have
access to services or rights or obligations in the UK. But the system, as it's
designed, is one, failing in its administrative terms, but two, is underpinning
a political narrative now that for many, many years has been propagated by
politicians who don't really care about refugees. They just care about division
and trying to win elections. It's unacceptable. Unacceptable. I actually think
those are cheap political points to make. What people care about is the
integrity of our borders. That's what they care about. Yeah, and you can have
well-managed and secure borders. But look at the evidence of where this populism
comes from. It's Donald Trump, it was Boris Johnson, it's Marine Le Pen. This is
a political strategy. It's not the reality of how it's been treated. I want to
bring the rest of our panel in. But a quick thought, Darren. Would you like to
see the safe and legal, as they're called, routes that currently exist, extended
to other countries and more broadly more refugees then? I think the safe and
legal routes should apply for people irrespective of where they come from. If
they need help and there's a safe and legal route and a proper reason for them
to get that help, it should be available to you. Thank you. Mary Dzhevski. Well,
I fully support the extension of Homes for Ukrainian Scheme to other asylum
seekers. I think it's worked on the whole extremely well, and I think it's a
template for the sort of thing that could happen. But I think there are a couple
of problems that maybe need to be noted. One of them is that the vast majority
of Ukrainians coming under that scheme, women and children, the vast majority of
asylum seekers and people coming across in small boats are young men. These are
completely different demographics to benefit from that sort of sponsorship from
homes as Homes for Ukrainians. And I think that needs to be borne in mind. And
it may be an argument why this is actually going to be more difficult. So does
that mean, when you talk about that you'd like to see similar schemes like the
Homes for Ukraine Scheme extended, what would that look like? And how would that
work? Well, what I was going to go on to say was that I think sponsorship is
vastly underused in the UK. And we should look at Canada and to a lesser extent
the United States, where community groups and church groups and individuals can
club together to sponsor new arrivals. And this often works extremely well
because there's a connection and there are means of being integrated into the
community, which at the moment by placing people in hotels this is absolutely
the opposite of what we could be doing. OK. Mary, thank you. The essence of the
question, James Heapoo, was why are we offering similar help to refugees from
other parts of the world? Why aren't we? Well, to answer the specific question I
ask, we are. I mean, as well as... In a very limited capacity. Well, I mean, I
just agree. As well as smuggling weapons into Ukraine. We're still smuggling
people out of Afghanistan. I'm trying to do it all the time. The people who
worked alongside UK armed forces and the wider British government efforts during
our time there. That continues. We have a well-established program for bringing
Syrian refugees and similarly Hong Kongers who are leaving the growing political
situation from the Chinese government in Hong Kong. So there are other schemes.
Now the thing that concerns me just about some of the conversation we've had so
far is the way that we conflate refugees and migrants, be they legal or illegal
migrants. The two are entirely... And it does a disservice to both cohorts to
conflate them for the sake of one big argument about migration. So we can have a
discussion and the question was why can't we do more specifically for refugees?
I say we are doing more. We can have a debate about whether we should do even
more. That's a perfectly fine thing. But we must not allow ourselves to accept,
because it is demonstrably not the case, that everybody that is crossing a boat
in the English Channel is a refugee. 30% of them have come from NATO member
Albania with ambition. But hang on just a minute there James, because of course
what the government says is that all those people coming are illegal migrants.
Some of them might call themselves refugees. But I mean they're not. I mean
they've not come from a dangerous... And we do a disservice to the very many
people in the world who need asylum when we bracket them in the same as those
who are seeking economic migration illegally. And I think that we should have
the two debates. One is around how we control our borders to have a legal
migration policy and to control illegal migration. The other is about the
country we want to be and the refuge we want to give to those who need asylum.
They're two entirely separate debates and they shouldn't be done as a single
answer to a question about refugees frankly. I mean James why is your party
failing so badly on this? I mean you've been in charge since 2010. Your last
manifesto said that whatever you did the British people would still be in charge
of what happened. How's that worked out? Well I think we are now on to illegal
migration rather than refugees. But to have that discussion it is
extraordinarily hard to control a maritime border where there is no
international sea space between UK and French territorial waters. We are not
able to go into France to stop the waters getting in the boats. We're going to
need to get a better deal with the French for that and the Prime Minister is
engaging with President Macron for exactly that. But the moment those boats
cross the halfway line in the channel they are in the UK. And so from that
moment onwards yes we need a much faster process for legislating. Yes we need to
remove so many of the legal loopholes that are being exploited by lawyers. We're
legislating for that too. We need to speed up the whole process but you cannot
stop people in the middle of the channel once they are in UK waters. Leave in
the first place. But we need to process quicker. Well Rishi Sunak has promised
to stop the boats, made it a priority, said he'd clear the backlog. He will.
Let's see how he gets on. If you want to have your say on this or anything else
we talk about Anita is the person on the end of the phone on Saturday lunchtime
03700 100 444 is the number that you need to call. Now let's move on to our next
which comes from Nellie Guttman. Hello Nellie. Hi there. As a lover of lettuce
and tomatoes and cucumbers and salad generally my question to the panel was when
last time members ate a turnip? Nellie thanks. When was the last time panel
members ate a turnip? Just for a little bit of context for those who might not
know exactly what Nellie is referring to. This was a comment made by the
Environment Secretary Therese Coffey who was actually in her defence saying that
people should eat seasonal produce like turnips referring to the shortages of
some other fresh produce that we've seen on the shelves. So to the question when
was last time panel members ate a turnip but to the broader point too about food
shortages, Taryn James. Do you know I'm largely a vegan and I can't remember the
last time I ate a turnip. Someone like me probably ought to be more regular than
you would think. Maybe you're feeling inspired. Maybe but there are two serious
issues here. One is about climate change and the other is about UK farming. So
on climate change if you think some extreme weather in North Africa and Southern
Europe has caused problems now wait to see what the world looks like on our
current trajectory for failing on national climate targets. Just on that of
course that is the reason that's been given to some of these food shortages is
extreme weather events in some of the countries that we import. Exactly. Too hot
in Morocco for example. It's going to get much much hotter. They're not going to
be able to produce tomatoes if we currently land. Some of the issues were about
it being too cold actually. But I think Southern Spain was unusually cold and
Morocco was flooded. It may just mean weather. I think pretty much everybody
recognises extreme weather is due to climate change these days. Maybe you're in
a very small minority. I am not a climate change denier. I believe in climate
change. The evidence is overwhelming but there's always too quick a default to
blame it on every difficult thing that happens. Well I mean I'm pretty
comfortable based on the evidence that these incidences are due to climate
change and that they are going to get much worse. Much worse in the future. And
so the second point is therefore really important which is how resilient is our
own supply chain within the UK for food production. Because over the last decade
or two we've become very used to kind of globalisation and kind of frictionless
supply chains and of course we used to be part of the European Union when some
of this stuff was a bit easier. All of that has changed and if we're going to
have resilient supply chains in the UK in the context of having left the
European Union and in the context of climate change we're going to have to do
much more for ourselves in the UK and that requires much more action from
government who has been far too complacent in helping farmers in the farming
community in this country. Darren, thank you. I mean James heaped to that point.
Minette Batters who is of course the president of the National Farmers Union has
been talking this week about some of the pressures that farmers are facing in
terms of energy costs, in terms of feed costs, in terms of inflation, saying
that is making it harder for them to produce the produce that we need
domestically. Yes, which is good because you've let me off the hook off the
turnip question. I'll ask you that in a minute don't you worry. I have to be
honest with you I'm I was thinking about this on the way here I had a hunt. You
were thinking about turnips on the way here. Yeah and I don't really don't think
I've ever bought one and I'm not convinced that I've chosen to be one but I'm
sure I will have done at some point. But last Sunday I did have great leaks
passing it to you know another sort of winter seasonal veg and there is a sort
of it is a sort of mark of our times that contrarianism in politics is so rife
that normally the thing that you dare say is I want seasonal food that has to be
flown into the UK out of season because you would get lambasted for the air
miles on your food. But the moment somebody says eat seasonally everybody's
jumping up and down saying we want to have flown in salad and it's all just a
bit nuts. The reality is you are in great farming country. There is amazing meat
reared very very locally Somerset is I would think home to the finest produce in
the world. I say as a Somerset. Farmers do have it tough because in supermarkets
the price points are at a place that don't match the costs of production and
that's a real challenge because in a cost of living crisis people want to be
able to provide for their families as cheap as possible and there is a real
tension. The NFU invited me to a meeting with some of my farmers near Sheptham
Mallet the other day and they were making exactly this point that you know on
the one hand there's a cost of living crisis there's not much sympathy for them
saying food should be more expensive but really good quality Somerset produce
can't be sold at the bargain basement prices that too many of our supermarkets
demand. I can't say I've got an answer here and now to be completely honest with
you and that's probably a faux pas for a government minister but as an MP that
represents a rural constituency I kind of want to see my farmers able to sell
their products directly to us as the consumer so we can choose to buy more
quality stuff through markets and farm shops locally and I want to see the
government and the supermarkets work to properly address food security whilst at
the same time making food affordable. What does that mean then more direct
government support for farmers? Well I think to be fair the team in Deaf are
looking at this there is a transition away from funding the EU subsidy was
simply around land ownership it's transitioning more to one around an
environmental good which I think is a good thing but what farmers would say is
the thing that's never been substituted subsidised actual food production and
thus food security that's not currently on the cards but I do think that just as
we have to take our energy security seriously we have to take our food security
seriously too. Okay James thank you. Mary are you a big fan of the turnip? I'm
not aware of having eaten a turnip other than in very disguised form in one of
those sort of pureed mixes of mashed potato, mashed turnip and mashed sweet
potato which makes it all so much easier so that is probably how I've eaten
turnips most recently but if we look to food production in the UK I think the
farmers have one completely justified complaint which is if this is true that
they were not given the same subsidies as a whole lot of other industries to
heat their greenhouses and their production lines through the winter then that
is a huge nidlage that was a huge hole in what should have happened why weren't
they given the same subsidies as industry for instance because they were just as
essential to the economy. Just on that point to explain so Minette Batters made
this point again quoting the President of the National Farmers Union this week
saying that in terms of the government support for energy intensive industries
farmers the horticulture sector specifically wasn't included in that. James why
wasn't it? I don't know. Should it have been? Well I mean I don't know I'm
afraid defence ministers do their best to swat up on the other 21 departments of
state before they come on but every now and then there's something come up you
don't know the answer to apologies. Well thank you for your honesty James.
Isabel Oakeshot on the turnip question but also the broader question about food
security and production. I love it when politicians occasionally admit that they
don't know the answer thank you for that. On the turnips I grew up in Scotland
so obviously neeps and tatties were a thing and when well cooked they're
actually quite nice but I can't say that I'm making them a staple of my diet at
the moment. I think that the subsidy system while we were in the EU was very
distorting and massively encouraged and incentivised the growth of mega farms
and monocultures which are really bad for the environment actually and I want
any subsidy systems to support mixed farms, smaller farms, anything that
produces smaller amount of really high quality stuff which we're good at here.
You know we don't have the I've been to these mega dairies these horrendous pig
farms in other countries where you literally have tens of thousands of animals
living in the most grotesque conditions. I don't want Britain to be like that
not for the sake of animal welfare not for the sake by the way of the huge
impact of intensive farming on carbon emissions so I hope that the new system
will discourage that and build British farming that we can really be proud of.
Thank you all and if you want to call in with your turnip recipes I'm sure Anita
would love to hear from you 03700 100444. Now let's move on to our next which
comes from Virginia Murray. Hello Virginia. Hello. Does the panel agree with
today's statement by the publishers of Roald Dahl's works that they will not be
seeking to censor his books after all? Virginia thank you for your question. So
just a little bit of background here we know that Dahl's publisher Poffin was
going to produce a slightly changed version of some of his novels now they're
going to publish the unaltered texts alongside those changed novels so the
question is do you agree with that? Mary Dejewski. I absolutely agree with that
as progress. I wish that nobody had tried to change them in the first place. I
understand that one of the arguments for changing it is that times have changed
and that some of the language and the sentiments weren't sort of compatible with
today's sensitivities. Well that is all fine and good but I remember in my
childhood the sort of children's books that I was reading obviously related to
30, 40, 50 years before and nobody said oh you know those sentiments aren't
compatible with life today. That was the sort of children's books that we were
reading. I remember reading lamplighters about matched children begging in the
streets and yes you know you didn't see that around you and thank goodness for
that but nobody said that it was wrong for children to be reading books that
were about times that were different. Mary thank you. Just a couple of the
changes that were proposed in the new text. Augustus Gloop from Charlie and the
Chocolate Factory would have been described as enormous with the word fat
removed from the book. Mrs Twit from the Twits, no longer ugly and beastly,
simply beastly. But as I say Puffin is now publishing the unedited versions too.
James Hebe. Thank heavens. It's nuts, it's a reflection of people power that the
sort of the old version were rocketing up the sort of best selling lists on
Amazon and other online book retailers which kind of showed what the British
public thought about that. As Mary rightly says all of these bits of literature
were written of their time and even classics who Jane Austen clearly isn't
writing about an experience of womanhood that anybody would recognise nowadays
but that doesn't mean that it needs to be censored and rewritten. It's just
literature that was of its time that can still be enjoyed now as a glimpse as to
what that time was as well as being great writing and I just think it's such a
shame that we keep insisting on tinkering with all this stuff. It's doing our
society no good at all. Now the Roald Dahl Story Company worked with the
publishers Puffin and Inclusive Minds which is a collective working towards
inclusion and accessibility in children's literature and a spokesman for the
Roald Dahl Story Company said it wanted to ensure that Roald Dahl's wonderful
stories and characters continue to be enjoyed by all children today when
publishing new print runs of books written years ago it's not unusual to review
the language she used alongside updating other details to include a book's cover
and page layout. It went on to say the principle was to maintain story lines,
characters and the irreverence and sharp edged spirit of the original text and
as I say the texts are now going to be published in full as well. Isabelle
Ochsors. I think this was a massive own goal by the publishers. It's been a huge
PR disaster for them. Everybody has come out against this almost uniformly so. I
mean it's got a lot of people talking about the books. Yeah, I don't think we
need the new version alongside the old version. Let's just stick with the old
version. It went way too far. I think there could be a case and in fact I'm sure
there is a case where there to be references in children's literature which were
clearly for example anti-Semitic or racist or something like that. But removing
the word fat is not going to make fat people any less fat or reduce the number
of people with a health problem because they've eaten too much. So nor why would
you change turning white with fear to something else? I mean that was one of the
mens made. I mean there's no kind of racist connotation with that at all. So I
think this was just a complete kind of nonsense really and I'm really glad that
the anti-woke brigade for once won the day. I mean Darren the argument for it
was that it would be done very sensitively but it was about reflecting I suppose
a different time and a different use of language. Yeah look if there were cases
of racism for example you as a parent you wouldn't want your children kind of
necessarily reading that. But I think that's the key point here. The concern was
about children reading children's books but that forgets the fact that there is
parenting in the equation. And of course I wouldn't want my kids who are very
little alone but when they're reading books to be reading things that are
discriminatory or whatever in that way. But it's part of my job as their parent
to make sure that either they don't read that in the first place or if they do
read something that I feel has a bit of tension around it that you explain it to
your children. You kind of talk to them about the book. And I think sometimes
the idea of wokeness can be over-egged a bit here. Darren thank you. We're going
to attempt something brave here. A final question in our last minute. I'll ask
you all to be quite brief but Bernadette please go ahead. What is the most
important change that's happened in this country since any questions chaired by
Freddie Greiswood came to Wilscombe as we used to call it in the early fifties?
There we are. So any questions was here in the early fifties. We're back again
now in a word or two each if you could. The most important change that's
happened since then is a below shot. Oh God I was really hoping you wouldn't
come to the first. The most important beneficial change. Technology, you know a
whole new world. Whole new world. Google. Some made a degree. Made my job
easier. Darren. To me, my family and now parts of my constituency, the national
minimum wage. Darren James, thank you. Mary Dijewski. The contraceptive pill
undoubtedly. James E. P. The abundance information that is now at our
fingertips. I can't think of anything more transformative. Extraordinary.
Wonderful. Thank you all for being so speedy on that last one. I'm glad we got
to it and Bernadette thank you for your question. I'm glad we returned to
Wilscombe with any questions. It has been a pleasure but unfortunately that is
all we've got time for. Now next week we'll be at Holbeck Working Men's Club in
Leeds. If you want to come along you can grab yourself a free ticket. We'd love
to see you. Just head to bbc.co.uk forward slash any questions. Follow the link
Holbeck Working Men's Club in Leeds. Get yourselves down there. But from here in
Wilscombe it leaves me to say thank you to our panel, thank you to our audience
and thank you at home for listening. Any questions came from St Andrew's Church
in Wilscombe. The presenter was Alex Forsythe, the producer Carmelia Sinclair
and the engineer was Tim Allen. You can find the chance to share your views by
ringing any answers now on 03 700 100 444. Explore the worlds of arts and
culture on front row. The atmosphere changes, the hair starts to stand up on the
back of your neck. The biggest news and interviews. It was an absolute dream of
mine to perform on a stage. Alongside live discussions, debates and the latest
reviews. She's a series of contrasts which I thought were quite fascinating. I
loved it. I can't recommend it enough because it's so thoroughly entertaining.
Join Samira Ahmed and me, Tom Suckliffe, for Front Row. You are a national
treasure. Live every Monday to Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15.