TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Day is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station. Hello
and welcome to Newsday on the BBC World Service with Rob Young and Reedy
Klabish. Coming up, Israeli settlers in the occupied West Bank have set fire to
Palestinian homes, businesses and vehicles after two Israelis were shot dead
there. The incidents took place as talks between the Israeli and Palestinian
negotiators were being held aimed at quelling a surge in West Bank violence.
Belarusian opposition figures say that a Russian military plane has been damaged
in a sabotage attack in Belarus. We'll talk to one exiled Belarusian politician
with knowledge of the attack. In England and Wales, the legal age at which
someone can marry has increased to 18. To prevent vulnerable children being
forced into marriage, we'll speak to a campaigner on the issue. And the global
popularity of South Korean culture continues to rise after the success of K-pop
and K-drama, reality TV from the country is gaining a worldwide following.
First, the news. Hello, I'm Neil Nunes with the BBC News. Israeli settlers have
set Palestinian homes, businesses and cars ablaze in the occupied West Bank,
killing one Palestinian man. The rampage followed the shooting dead of two
Israeli brothers earlier in the same village of Huara near Nablus. Yusuf Taha
now has more details. Flames and smoke billowed into the night sky at the
Palestinian Red Crescent said it had treated nearly 400 wounded people. One is
reported to be seriously hurt after being hit on the head with a rock. Residents
have accused the Israeli security forces of helping the settlers carry out the
revenge attack and preventing ambulances from reaching the scene. But Israeli
settlers said they were demanding that the security forces deal with what they
called nests of terror in the area. The rampage has been condemned by the
Palestinian National Authority, the European Union and the United States, as
well as many Israelis. The United Nations Human Rights Council begins a mammoth
five-week session in Geneva starting on Monday. The council promotes human
rights worldwide. More now from our correspondent Imogen Fowkes who is in
Geneva. Alleged war crimes in Ukraine or Ethiopia, the brutal suppression of
women in Afghanistan and Iran, the UN Human Rights Council has a packed agenda.
Western diplomats are promising to keep the attention on Russia but there will
be in-depth reports on Myanmar and South Sudan, North Korea and Belarus. China,
despite a damning report from the UN Human Rights Office suggesting Beijing had
committed crimes against humanity against the Uyghur community, is not on the
agenda. Member states rejected a plan to debate that report last year. Imogen
Fowkes reporting. The president of the European Commission is to meet the
British Prime Minister near London later today in a joint statement Ursula von
der Leyen and Rishi Sunak said they would work together to resolve the dispute
on trading arrangements for Northern Ireland that's arisen after Britain's
withdrawal from the European Union. As Katja Adler in Brussels reports, Ms von
der Leyen's visits suggest the EU and the UK are on the cusp of a deal. For
Rishi Sunak, a deal avoids a looming trade war with Brussels after the
government previously threatened to unilaterally override the original Northern
Ireland agreement. Better relations also open up new possibilities like UK
access to the EU's respected horizon research program and improved arrangements
with France to stop people smugglers. France and the UK hold an important summit
next month while in April Mr. Sunak hopes to tempt the US president to join him
for a ceremony marking 25 years of the Good Friday Belfast Agreement. This is
the world news from the BBC. Exiled Belarusian opposition figures say a Russian
military plane has been damaged in a sabotage attack inside the country. They've
attributed the attack to what they call anti-government partisans. Drones are
said to have caused two or three blasts at the airbase near Minsk damaging a
Russian A-50 military surveillance plane, its avionics and radar and taking it
out of action. Tens of thousands of people have taken part in protests across
Mexico against government plans to slash funding for the National Electoral
Institute. The largest demonstration was in Mexico City. Organizers said half a
million people had taken to the streets nationwide. Chile will on Monday deploy
troops to patrol its borders with Peru and Bolivia in an attempt to control the
entry of undocumented migrants. Military units will be posted to a number of
northern regions with powers to detain anyone passing through unauthorized
border crossings and hand them over to local police. The dimension-hopping
adventure Everything Everywhere All at Once has won the top film prize at the
Screen Actors Guild Awards in Los Angeles. The film about a Chinese-American
laundromat owner struggling to finish her taxes also won three acting awards.
Our reporter Reagan Morris is in Los Angeles. Michelle Yeoh won Best Female
Actor for her role in Everything Everywhere All at Once. She plays a middle-aged
Chinese-American immigrant with a struggling business and marriage and an
unlikely destiny to save humanity. It's a groundbreaking multi-universe time
travel movie beloved by audiences and critics. After the cast won Best Ensemble,
their 94 year old co-star James Hong received a standing ovation. Former child
star Kei He Kwan won Best Supporting Actor becoming the first Asian man to win
in that category. That's the latest BBC World News. Thank you for that news and
welcome to Newsday with Rob Young and Reedy Clabby. This half hour we've got
stories for you from the West Bank, from Belarus and from India. We'll also
discuss a new law in England and Wales increasing the legal age for marriage
from 16 to 18. And after the global popularity of the band BTS and the drama
Squid Game, why South Korean reality TV seems to be the country's next big
cultural export. To our top story now, Israeli settlers in the occupied West
Bank have set fire to Palestinian houses, shops and vehicles killing one
Palestinian man. After two Israelis were earlier shot dead in the same place.
The violence took place in the village of Huara just south of Nablus. The
Palestinian Red Cross has said it has treated nearly 400 wounded people, many of
them from inhaling tear gas fired by Israeli security forces and what you've
been hearing there it's a lot of shouting explosions and sirens. Palestinians on
social media have voiced outrage at the scale of the rioting but protesting
Israeli settlers said they were demanding that the security forces deal with
what they called nests of terror in the area. I've been speaking to Libby
Lankinsky who's with the New Israel Fund, an NGO seeking social justice and
equality for all Israelis about the situation. Well you know I think that if the
images that we saw from Huara which were Israeli Jewish settlers encircling the
town, burning it, vandalizing it, then people haven't been paying attention to
the things that me and my colleagues at New Israel Fund have been paying
attention to and seeing not just for the last few months but for the last years
in which the national religious and settler enterprise in Israel have been
completely mainstreamed and normalized within the Israeli political system. So
this did not come out of nowhere and with the army's role this is also not new.
The army and the settlers have a very symbiotic relationship. I found it
particularly rich to see Minister Bitzalel Smotrich who's the finance minister
with extended authorities also into the West Bank and Prime Minister Netanyahu
tweeting don't take the law into your own hands. Isn't that his attempt then to
calm the situation because there were two Israelis who were shot dead there. How
do we place that incident in what is happening right now? One could see it as
trying to quell the flames but what we've seen for the last seven weeks every
Saturday night is hundreds of thousands of Israelis of all kinds marching in the
streets in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem and Haifa and now in towns throughout the
country protesting this government's attempt to actually take the entire legal
system into their own hands. In particular the High Court of Justice, Israel's
Supreme Court, in order to protect exactly this faction and so one could read it
as an attempt to you know take down the flames. One could also read it as we
don't need you to make this look so bloody because we're taking care of it from
inside the corridors of power. This is coinciding with a high-level security
meeting between Israeli and Palestinian officials in Jordan. Do you hold out
much hope for what the talks can achieve? Well I think that the talks alone will
be empty unless the American administration and others hold the Israeli
government to their promises and I don't know what will happen but I have seen
ministers including Bitzalos Modric promising their base that they won't freeze
settlement construction even for one day and that was one of the items that was
discussed in Jordan between the Americans, the Israelis, the Palestinians and
other leadership from the region was what is each side going to do to try to
quell the uptick in violence and so if everybody upholds their agreements
perhaps it can bring some calm. To me the only hopeful future for Israel is a
democratic one and it's going to take all of us to make that happen so a
combination of actual accountability for whatever was said in Jordan including
to freeze settlement construction and continued pressure from the Israeli
electorate. And the situation right now the number of people injured we
understand has reached about 400. How do you see this wave of violence ending?
What should happen now immediately? Well I would hope that leaders from Israel
will call this violence off very directly but I don't know. I don't know what
will happen next. It's a really dynamic situation. It's changing every day. The
government continues to announce new intentions. People are interpreting them in
all kinds of ways and there have been other acts of violence just recently
throughout the West Bank so we we don't know. And that was Libby Lenkinski of
the New Israel Fund and they say they are working to democratise Israel and to
also promote human rights for Palestinians and Israelis. Now the Belarusian
opposition in exile claims that a Russian military aircraft has been damaged at
an airfield near the capital Minsk calling this the most successful sabotage
operation in Belarus since the start of the conflict in Ukraine. Belarus which
is north of Ukraine is a close ally of Russia's President Putin and was one of
the launching pads of the Russian invasion last year. Well we're joined from
Lithuania by Franak Vyachuka, a Belarusian politician and chief political
adviser to Svetlana Tarkhanovskaya, the head of the Belarusian opposition.
Welcome to the programme. So just tell us about this operation. What actually
happened? Yesterday morning the locals reported two explosions in the airfield
near Minsk. Then there were more information coming from the state. They said
that the war plane and other equipment was damaged and later we got information
from our partisan groups that it was a special operation to destroy the Russian
airplane. Basically they dropped two bombs from the drones over this plane. The
cost of this plane is 330 million euros and they say, they claim that this plane
will not be able to fly anymore. So these partisans already left the country
very quickly and the regime is trying to find them immediately. The regime, the
KGB thought that it was conducted by Ukrainians but they are wrong. It was
conducted by Belarusians who resist both Lukashenko and the Russian occupation.
Right, so this would sound quite a sophisticated operation then if they were
dropping bombs by drone. It was sophisticated, it was creative, it was very
brave because Belarusians in the situation of the total terror, every act of the
disobedience is punished by years of prison. There are more than 5,000 people in
jails for political reasons so these guys were preparing for a long time and
they were definitely helped by locals, helped by military because Belarusian
military, they don't support Lukashenko and they don't want Belarus to
participate in the war. So I believe that right now the regime will start the
wave of repressions. And do you support this operation politically? You think
this was a good thing, do you? Absolutely, absolutely. We support nonviolent
resistance and this is nonviolent because no people harmed their equipment. Hang
on, there's been no independent confirmation of what actually took place here
and if you're going to drop bombs you can't be certain that nobody will be
harmed. We are doing all possible to keep the resistance nonviolent because it's
the regime which uses violence and this plane, this is a spy plane, it was used
by Russian army every time when the attacks from Crimea and from Belarus
territory happened on Ukraine. So it will help and we hope it will help to save
thousands of Ukrainian lives. And so do you expect these partisans as you call
them then to carry out further similar attacks? Absolutely, there are up to
200,000 people subscribed to this underground movement. There were conducted
already 80 acts of sabotage with railways which were stopping Russian trains in
the first months of the war and definitely there will be more operations. This
is how Belarusians show that they do support Ukraine, they don't give up, they
will fight Russian occupation so long as it's needed. And how would you expect
the authorities controlled by President Lukashenko to respond? They will start
to find the guilty ones. They already started to monitor the social networks,
all those who comment negatively the acts of Lukashenko and Putin will be
jailed. So it's leading to further repression then? Yeah, I believe there will
be dozens or hundreds of arrests, there will be propaganda campaigns, they will
be trying to find the traitors and they will try to find someone or the country
to blame. But of course it's their fault and they must understand that the
people of their country don't want them anymore. So if, as you say, hundreds of
people are potentially imprisoned who perhaps had no involvement in this attack
on this aeroplane at all, do you think the operation was still worth it? I think
they will be looking for the people, for the traitors inside the system, inside
of the secret services. They already arrested all the active Belarusians, all
the party leaders, all the journalists and now they are looking for traitors
within the system. So the system will eat itself, really. Franak Viuciuka,
thanks very much indeed for joining us from Lithuania. Alright, let's get the
very latest in sports. Now Isaac, my mother is a die-hard Chelsea fan, my
husband, a die-hard Man U fan. They were in vastly different moods this weekend,
I don't know why. I think that's going to be the same in the studio as well
because there is a die-hard Newcastle fan who's probably in the same mood as
your mother, unfortunately, because Manchester United are back in the trophy
winning business. They got a 2-0 win over Newcastle United in the League Cup
final at Wembley to give manager Erik ten Hag his first trophy as boss and the
club its first in six years. Are you okay? I'm fine. I did listen to the
commentary on the World Service, it was terribly good as you'd imagine of
course, but I think we played well. You've got to put it into a broader context.
Newcastle's improvement in recent years has been pretty startling. Yes, exactly.
You can't win them all. No, our time will come. Exactly, exactly. You know, a
first trophy in what, 60 years will surely be broken soon. Was there more sport?
There is more sport. That Chelsea match you were talking about. Tottenham beat
Chelsea 2-0 and cranking up the pressure on the Chelsea boss, Graham Potter. The
Blues haven't won a game, well they've won two of their last 15 matches. Lionel
Messi scored his 700th goal as Paris Saint-Germain beat rivals Marseille 3-0.
Kylian Mbappe scored the other two for his 200th goal for the club. I'll have a
little bit more sport later on in the programme. Look forward to it, I think.
Thanks, Isaac. Now, finance ministers from the world's largest economies have
failed to agree on a closing statement to their summit. This is all to do with
Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Nick Marsh joins us from the business desk in
Singapore. Was that a disappointing conclusion to them, to this summit of, after
all, finance ministers? Yeah, I suppose it was quite disappointing. Not hugely
surprising, you have to say, given the divides that we're seeing in the world
when it comes to the war in Ukraine. We saw a similar thing at the G20 leaders
summit in Bali last November. There was a closing statement then which said most
of us condemn the war but some countries take a different view. Similar thing
here, really. It was Russia themselves, of course, and China who refused to go
along with the majority. And part of their argument was that, you know, this is
a G20 finance meeting and the Russians see this as a kind of hijacking by
Western countries to try and condemn Russia and ostracise it. Further, the
Americans and other Western countries, their counter-argument is that, look,
this war's had massive economic consequences, inflation, energy prices. It's a
non-negotiable to address a war like this in a big global summit. India, the
hosts, obviously left in a bit of a sticky spot. They've never condemned Russia
themselves but they did want something a bit more positive to end the G20
meeting with but no agreement in this case. Thanks very much indeed, Nick Marsh
there with that update on that G20 finance ministers summit which was taking
place in Bengaluru in India. You're listening to Newsday on the BBC World
Service. And with that let's say goodbye to our colleagues on the World Service
to begin another day, another week here on BBC Radio 4. Good morning, it's just
coming up to twenty past five on Monday the 27th of February. This is Vigie
Ellis. Thank you so much for joining us from wherever you are. It's twenty past
six in the evening in Wellington where England are doing well having finally
bowled out New Zealand for 483. They are now chasing a target of 254 to win the
second test and are on 39 for one. Zaccrawley out for 24. There's a discussion
to be had. Ben Rich is standing by with a shifting forecast for us but first
let's take a look ahead to Friday morning. On BBC Radio 4. We are all a unique
accumulation of our own unique experiences and knowledge. The poet Lem Sissay
looks at uniqueness. Rainfall like applause is utterly unique every time it
happens. Reflecting on the occasions he's stood out. In a room full of graduates
people without degrees can sometimes get defensive about it. Not me! Lem Sissay
is the one and only. He'll like an aw. Starting this Friday morning at 11.30 on
Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now let's head down to the BBC Weather Centre and join
Ben Rich. Morning Ben. Hello Vigie, thank you. Good morning to you. It is time
for the shipping forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and
Coast Guard Agency at 05.05 today Monday 27 February 2023. There are warnings of
gales in Seoul and Shannon. The general synopsis at midnight. High Scotland 1038
expected fair isle 1040 by midnight tonight. The area forecasts for the next 24
hours. Viking northerly or northwesterly 3 to 5 occasionally 6 in east showers
good. North at 0 south at 0 40s northerly 4 to 6 showers good. Cromarty variable
becoming north later 2 to 4 fair good. Forth north or northeast 2 to 4
occasionally 5 later showers later good. Tyne Dogger north or northeast 3 to 5
showers good. Fisher northerly 4 to 6 becoming variable 2 to 4 later fair good.
Germanbight northerly 3 to 5 becoming variable 2 to 4 later showers good. Humber
northeast 3 to 5 showers good. Thames northeast 4 to 6 showers good. Dover white
east or northeast 4 to 6 increasing 7 for a time showers good. Portland Plymouth
east or northeast 4 to 6 showers in south good. Biscay northeast 4 to 6
occasionally 7 at first mainly fair good. South Fitzroy easterly or
northeasterly 4 to 6 occasionally 7 in east mainly fair good occasionally poor
later in west. North Fitzroy sole easterly or southeasterly 5 to 7 occasionally
gale 8 later in far west sole rain later in west good occasionally moderates
later in west. Lundy east or northeast 3 to 5 fair good. Fasnet east or
northeast 4 to 6 fair good. Irish Sea east or northeast 3 to 5 fair good.
Shannon southeasterly 5 to 7 occasionally gale 8 in far west decreasing 4 or 5
later mainly fair good. Rockall southerly or southeasterly 4 to 6 occasionally 7
until later in west fair good. Malin Hebrides southerly or southeasterly 3 to 5
becoming variable 3 or less later fair good. Bailey southerly 4 to 6
occasionally 7 in west at first fair good. Fair Isle northwest becoming variable
2 to 4 fair good. Faroes south or southwest 3 to 5 fair good. Southeast Iceland
southerly or southwesterly 4 to 6 showers good occasionally moderate. And now
the weather reports from coastal stations for 0400 Tyree Automatic south by west
to 22 miles 1037 rising slowly. Stornoway east southeast to 19 miles 1036 rising
slowly. Lerwick northwest to 32 miles 1035 rising slowly. Lucas northwest 1 13
miles 1037 rising slowly. Bridlington north 3 1033 steady. Sandetti Light Vessel
Automatic east northeast 5 11 miles 1028. Greenwich Light Vessel Automatic 5
miles 1028. Jersey northeast 3. Channel Light Vessel Automatic northeast 6 1029.
Scilly Automatic east northeast 4 19 miles 1030 steady. Flenshire east southeast
3 24 miles 1030 steady. Ronalds Way northeast by north 2 1035 falling slowly.
Matlin Head southeast by south 3 8 miles 1036 now rising. And now the weather
forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern Ireland valid for
the following 24 hours issued by the Met Office at 0500. The general situation a
large area of intensifying high pressure will be slow moving near northern
Scotland with strong northeasterly winds affecting some southern areas at times.
From Cape Wrath to Rattray Head including Orkney. Variable mainly north 2 to 4.
Showers good. Rattray Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed. North or northeast 2 to 4
occasionally 5 later. Fair good. Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby. North or
northeast 3 to 5. Showers good. Whitby to Gibraltar Point. North or northeast 3
to 5. Fair then showers good. Gibraltar Point to North Forland. Northerly or
northeasterly 4 or 5 occasionally 6 in south. Showers good. North Forland to
Celsey Bill. Easterly or northeasterly 4 to 6. Showers near North Forland. Good.
Celsey Bill to Lyme Regis. East or northeast 4 to 6. Fair. Good. Lyme Regis to
Land's End including the Isles of Scilly. East or northeast 4 to 6. Showers
later. Good. Land's End to St David's Head including the Bristol Channel. East
or northeast 3 to 5. Showers for a time. Good. St David's Head to Great Ormahead
including St George's Channel. East or northeast 3 to 5. Fair. Good. Great
Ormahead to the Mull of Galloway. East or northeast 3 to 5. Fair. Good. Isle of
Man. East or northeast 3 to 5. Fair. Good. Loch Foyle to Carlingford Lock. East
or southeast 2 to 4. Fair. Good. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre including
the Firth of Clyde and North Channel. Variable mainly easterly 2 to 4. Fair.
Good. Mull of Kintyre to Ardnamurchan Point. Variable mainly southeast 2 to 4.
Fair. Good. Ardnamurchan Point to Cape Wrath. Variable 3 or less. Fair. Good.
Shetland Isles. North or northwest becoming variable for a time 2 to 4. Showers
for a time. Good. And a reminder of the general situation. A large area of
intensifying high pressure will be slow moving near northern Scotland with
strong northeasterly winds affecting some southern areas at times. And that area
of high pressure is going to bring lots of dry weather for us through the week
ahead. I'll have details on that in just a moment but for now it's back to Viji.
Ben, thanks very much indeed. This is BBC Radio 4. It's half past 5 on Monday
the 27th of February. Good morning. This is News Briefing with Viji Ellis. The
Prime Minister will meet the EU's top official later for final talks on a new
Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. Safety investigators have warned of the
significant stress on NHS staff in England. In business an Australian firm has
rescued the battery maker British Volt from administration. And in sport New
Zealand have set England's cricketers a target of 258 to win the second test in
Wellington. Rishi Sunak is meeting the European Commission President in the UK
this afternoon for what Downing Street has described as the final talks about
post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. A deal could be announced
later. Mr. Sunak is under pressure from unionists and Tory MPs to ensure
Northern Ireland isn't subject to EU rules while not having a say on them. But
the former Prime Minister Sir John Major says the role of the European Court of
Justice in settling trade disputes shouldn't be seen as a reason to block the
deal. Their involvement would be tiny, partial and occasional. And if we can get
in a reform all the trade changes we need, the easier access for trade into
Northern Ireland, then the fact that there will be a minute occasional
involvement of the European Court of Justice really ought not to stop an
agreement being made. Safety investigators say doctors, ambulance dispatchers
and other NHS staff in England have faced significant distress and harm over the
past year as a result of long delays in emergency care. The health care safety
investigation branch said many staff interviewed broke down in tears when they
were asked about their working environment. Neil Alexander is the report's lead
author. All of them were very emotional. We found that everybody wanted to
deliver the best care that they could for their patients but were unable to a
lot of the time because they were starting to feel the effects of the pressures
in the system which had a massive impact on their welfare which meant that some
staff were unable to be at work becoming unwell, being physically unwell or
mentally unwell. NHS England says it takes staff well-being very seriously while
the government said the number of ambulances and hospital beds was being
increased. The energy regulator Ofgem will outline the details of its latest
price cap for England, Wales and Scotland this morning. The announcement will
not affect what households pay for each unit of gas and electricity because that
is limited by a government price guarantee but the new cap is likely to show
that government is paying less to subsidise people's energy costs than was
expected. The farming minister is expected to meet representatives of the UK
supermarkets today to discuss how to address the current shortages of some fruit
and vegetables. Several retailers have put limits on how much of certain
products people can buy. The industry and the government are blaming extreme
weather for disrupting crops from Spain and Morocco. From today the age a person
can get married in England and Wales has risen from 16 to 18. Under the new
rules adults who facilitate the marriage of anyone under 18 could face up to
seven years in jail and a fine. The change also applies to religious or cultural
marriage ceremonies that aren't legally recognised. The move is an attempt to
protect vulnerable children. The Isle of Man cricket team have registered the
lowest score in men's 2020 history. In a defeat by Spain they were all out for
10 having been dismissed in under nine overs. The previous lowest score was the
15 made by Sydney Thunder against Adelaide Strikers last year. Now Ben Rich is
back with today's weather. Yes indeed thank you VG good morning to you. We've
got high pressure in charge of the weather at the moment. That high centred
across Scotland. It is going to dominate the weather across the UK really as we
head through this week and what that means is a lot of dry weather. Not always a
huge amount of sunshine. There will be some quite large areas of cloud. One or
two showers at times and temperatures really around the normal for the time of
year. But what we've got out there this morning is some quite large areas of
cloud floating in at the moment across parts of eastern Scotland, eastern
England. Those areas of cloud will drift westwards through the day perhaps
generating the odd shower but really the forecast wherever you are across the UK
is pretty much the same. A mix of patchy cloud and sunny spells with just the
small chance of one or two passing showers. The best of the sunshine I think
will be found across the north and the west of Scotland and also at times across
southern parts of England. Will be quite breezy as well for some North Sea
coasts of England and through the English Channel coast as well. Temperatures
generally between 6 and 9 degrees so that's about where we should be for this
stage in late February. Overnight we will keep some large areas of cloud, some
clear spells too. If the skies stay clear where you are there will be a touch of
frost widely across Scotland. Temperatures dropping below freezing for instance.
Elsewhere generally hovering around or just above freezing. Tomorrow large areas
of cloud, some sunny spells. It will be mostly dry aside from some showers
affecting southern parts of England. Thank you Ben. Time now for a look at the
papers. Can Sunak sell his Brexit deal? That's what the Daily Mail calls the
burning question as the European Commission President heads to the UK for talks
this afternoon. It says a new agreement on Northern Ireland trade could trigger
what it's calling another Tory civil war. The Daily Telegraph also warns that a
revolt is brewing, reporting that unionists and Tory Eurosceptics are refusing
to back a deal unless EU law is expunged from Northern Ireland. The Times says
the Prime Minister has been on a charm offensive to sell it to MPs. The paper
has a guide to what it calls the tribes that need taming within the Tory ranks
along with a danger rating for how likely it is each group could scupper the
deal. This could be the most perilous week of Rishi Sunak's political life says
the Guardian. The Daily Express quotes the Prime Minister as promising the
accord is best for Britain and will prove that Brexit works. The Financial Times
has been told the deal could enable pets to travel freely between Great Britain
and Northern Ireland without the need for microchips and passports. Energy
nightmare reads the front page headline of the Daily Mirror. It carries a call
from campaigners for the government to prevent an expected 500 pounds rise in
the typical annual energy bill from April. The paper says the increase will push
an extra 1.7 million households into fuel poverty. The Guardian meanwhile
features a demand from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation and the Trussell Trust for
the government to reform the welfare system after their calculations showed that
the basic benefits given to low-income households fall short of the real cost of
food, energy and other basics. Students sitting the International Baccalaureate
will be allowed to use the artificial intelligence chatbot chatGPT to write
their essays according to the Times. It says the qualification body will allow
pupils to court work that is generated by the technology as long as they credit
it. The idea it says is to enable children to use the tool ethically just as
they have learned to use technology such as calculators and translating apps. A
picture of a triumphant Manchester United lifting the Carabao Cup features in
the Daily Mirror which says the club are in Wembley dreamland after their two-
nil victory over Newcastle. The Sun heaps praise on their manager Eric Ten Hag
with the headline Hag bags first cup. The Guardian offers some sympathy for the
losing side pointing out that Newcastle missed out on the chance to land their
first trophy since 1969. Animal lovers are causing conflict between cats,
badgers, hedgehogs and other British wildlife by leaving out food in the garden.
A study cited by The Telegraph has found. The paper says researchers at
Nottingham Trent University and the University of Brighton have analysed videos
recorded by the public to investigate the interactions between different
species. They found that animals would often get into fights over the scraps
with badgers usually coming out on top. Business news now and the collapsed
battery maker British Volt has been bought out of administration by the
Australian firm Recharge Industries with more details and the rest of the
headlines here's Nick Marsh. British Volt had plans to build a four billion
pound battery plant near the port of Blyth in Northumberland but collapsed last
month after running out of money. Their new owner Recharge Industries is another
startup owned and run by New York based investment firm Scale Facilitation.
Speaking to the BBC the fund's chief executive David Collard admitted his
company lacked experience but said he wants to start construction on a plant
within six to twelve months and hopes to create up to 8,000 jobs. I'm not saying
I'm the best person in the world to run this project I think the legal
obligations from the administrators very much are to get the best return for the
creditors. I do think they care though as individuals about what the future
holds and we've put forward our case and we've been nothing but successful in
everything we've set out to do so far. The Labour leader Sakhir Starmer is to
lay out his plans for the economy later today at a round table with business
leaders in the City of London. Labour's warned that the UK risks falling behind
countries in Eastern Europe if recent growth trends continue. Without
improvements to the economy they say people in the UK would be worse off than
Poland's population by 2030 and would fall behind Hungary and Romania's by 2040.
And the government is setting up a league table for job centres. As part of a
pilot scheme at 60 centres, staff who get the most people into work will get 250
pound bonuses. The government said it's right to reward staff when they help
people secure work but unions have called the scheme gimmicky. Markets now and
Hong Kong's Hang Seng index is fractionally up by about two points that's
roughly 0.01 percent. In Tokyo a little earlier the Nikkei was down 50 points
that's about 0.2 percent and on the currency markets the pound is trading at
$1.20 against the euro. Sterling's at 1.13. That makes one euro worth 88 pence.
Nick Marsh. Support now and with the latest from England's second test against
New Zealand in Wellington here's Paul Serres. Thank you. Good morning. Play on
day four of the second test has just finished with England on 48 for one chasing
258 for victory. The Tauris bowled New Zealand out for 483 in their second
innings with Jack Leach taking five for 157. Football and Manchester United beat
Newcastle 2-0 in the League Cup final at Wembley Stadium to lift the first
silverware of the season. Elsewhere Tottenham were 2-0 winners over Chelsea in
the Premier League and Celtic beat Rangers 2-1 at Hampden Park to win the
Scottish League Cup. Rugby Union and France beat Scotland 32-21 in the Six
Nations to end Gregor Townsend's side's hopes of the Grand Slam. In snooker Sean
Murphy beat Ali Carter 10-4 to win the Players Championship, his first
tournament win since 2020 and the 10th ranking title of his career. And in
tennis the British number one Cameron Norrie beat the world number two Carlos
Alcaraz to win the final of the Rio Open. Thank you Paul. Finally a glance back
at some of the stories that were making news on this date in earlier years. At
the 2017 Oscars ceremony there was a fiasco over the Best Picture award. Faye
Dunway and Warren Beatty were mistakenly given the wrong envelope and announced
the winner as La La Land instead of the real winner Moonlight. In 2013 Pope
Benedict gave his final public address in St. Peter's Square a day before he
became the first Pope in around 600 years to step down. Speaking to a crowd of
tens of thousands he recalled the turbulent seas of his papacy seen as a comment
on the sex abuse scandals and corruption claims that had rocked the Roman
Catholic Church. The Pope said he would stand by the church. I will continue to
accompany the church with my prayers and I ask each of you to pray for me and
for the new Pope. In 1933 the Reichstag in Berlin where the German Parliament
met was burned down. The Nazis blamed the Communists giving them a reason to
arrest, imprison and kill many of them. In 1990 the oil company Exxon and its
shipping subsidiary were indicted over a devastating oil spill involving one of
its tankers off the coast of Alaska. 11 million gallons of crude leaked into the
sea when the ship ran aground and a group of masked and costumed students danced
through the streets of New Orleans in 1827 marking the city's first Mardi Gras
celebration. And that look back completes today's news briefing. Now on Radio 4
it's time for prayer for the day with the Canon Edwin Council who leads the
Glamorgan Heritage Ministry area for the Church in Wales. Good morning or more
correctly bonjour because I'm on pilgrimage from my home in South Wales to
Brittany walking in the footsteps of St. David known as Saint-Denis in this part
of the world and discovering the impact of his life that still resonates 15
centuries later. I'm near the village of Dirignan a few miles from the city of
Brest in northwestern France at the site of a holy well dedicated not to David
but to none his mother and this is a place of real beauty and stillness in the
heart of the Breton countryside and I'm just the latest of a long line of
pilgrims stretching back a thousand years or more who have been drawn to this
place probably on their way back from the nearby village of Saint-Denis named
after and dedicated to non's saintly son. But I've come here to the holy well
not the church because there are fundamental things about St. Non that speak
into the complexity of human life and inform my pilgrimage. Non's well is a
place of healing and wholeness and the paradox is that it draws people often in
the times of brokenness in their lives perhaps living with illness or injury and
the consequent pain that can overshadow everyday life and living. For others the
wounds are hidden and yet the pain is equally deep. St. Non herself settled here
in the life of prayer and solitude towards the end of her life having lived with
the trauma of sexual violence and of her son St. David being conceived through
that assault. I'm searching for a contemporary understanding of ancient
traditions but I'm starting to discover deeper truths. The beauty and brokenness
coexist in human life in so many ways spanning families and communities as well
as the centuries. God of our pilgrimage take the brokenness of our lives and
find in each of us the corresponding beauty that reflects your love healing and
peace today. Amen. Prayer for the day was presented by the Canon Edwin Council.
Now on Radio 4 Farming Today with Charlotte Smith. Good morning. Today years of
losing money on every pig. What's the future for UK pig farmers? Two years of
continual financial hemorrhaging. You know that's a really big black hole to try
and backfill and it's going to be a good couple of years I would suggest until
you see us back to where we were a couple of years ago in a far more positive
position. More on that later. First though we're heading to Cheshire. It's
another farming hit on social media, hoof trimming. Sophie Mitchell-Smith began
helping her father Richard back in 2012 and during lockdown began posting on
Instagram. She's one of the few female professional cattle hoof trimmers in the
UK and 15,000 people now follow her online. Patrick Kightley caught up with
Sophie and Richard. I was coming across farming accounts that were quite popular
and I thought oh well I wonder how it'd go if I did it and it massively took off
and it really surprised me how interested people are in not necessarily seeing a
woman doing it but just in the just seeing foot trimming in general. I've had
hardly any negativity of it. It's all been really positive and just been really
surprised at how well it's gone. When I was younger I was going along with my
mum and dad. I was gradually getting a bit more of an interest in it. I found it
really fascinating. What did you love about it? What I loved seeing was when say
like when my mum and dad picked a foot up that they treated and I'd seen that
they'd improved the foot so much and the cow walks out and you can tell she's a
lot more comfortable and I was like that's really satisfying and I want to be
able to do something like that. How well does a father-daughter team work? Is it
as wonderful as you'd imagine or do you get your moments? I think if we get any
moments of disagreement we have a sit down and Sophie decides that she was
right. I'm the actual boss. Generally we work really well together and we're
quite close anyway aren't we? Yeah we'll go long periods without even speaking.
You just pick up on what the other person's going to do. You just know what the
other person's going to do and it works really well and you just get on with it.
Philip Brocklehurst, you're the man in charge here at Oak Farm. Why is regular
hoof trimming so vital for the health of your herd of dairy cows? It's to keep
the cows mobility better and sometimes a cow will pick up a stone when it comes
into the yard and that's what we're looking for so that the cows aren't lame. It
also helps with the yield because if a cow can't walk it can't eat and if it
doesn't eat it doesn't produce milk. Life goes pretty well for father and
daughter hoof trimmers. There just seems to be one problem they've just never
managed to solve. We have a problem with the farmers. They don't seem to be able
to get to grips with what a necrotic toe is. It's a bad condition but they never
call it a necrotic toe. It's a neurotic toe, it's a narcotic toe, it's a
nihilistic toe. A narcissistic toe. And a narcissistic toe. That report from
Patrick Kightley. Now let's talk about volatile prices in both pigs and dairy.
First dairy where farmers got record prices for milk last year to cover their
increasing costs but now those prices are falling and are expected to fall
further as more milk becomes available in the spring. Arla and First Milk are
both farmer owned cooperatives. They process milk for sale in supermarkets and
also make it into other products like cheese and yogurt. Our reporter Heather
Simons met the bosses of both at this year's NFU conference last week. First,
managing director of Arla Foods UK, Ash Amiramadi. So on-farm costs have gone up
by over 80% over the last year and a half. The farm gate price has also gone up
but those two are about the same. So actually what we're seeing is a break-even
situation for our farmers. Dairy like many other markets has cycles where demand
and supply go out of balance with each other. We've actually had a cycle where
there's been insufficient supply for the demand. We're now moving to a market
where there's more supply. However, what we need to be really careful about is
to make sure that the impact of that on farmers doesn't lead to cost of
production issues and ultimately supply issues into supermarkets. Do you see
prices dipping below the cost of production again? Well I think that's something
that we are concerned about prices dropping below cost of production because
what we don't want to see is the situation that the dairy industry was in last
year where actually milk supply was not enough to fill the supermarket shelves
and we've seen that happen in some other food category areas. So that's what
we're trying to avoid. We need to make sure that we're looking after farmers,
covering the cost of production but also helping them make the right decisions
on farm around the green transition that they're making as well. I want to get
on to that in just a moment but first there will be people listening to this
thinking you're saying you're worried about the price paid to farmers but aren't
you the guy who pays them so why don't you just pay them more? Arla is a farmer
cooperative so we are the farmers and everything that we collect from our
customers we pay back to our farmers. Unfortunately we also produce ingredients
and those ingredients are sold at market prices and it's those ingredients that
are feeling the downward pressure not what we're selling to retailers. I'm going
to bring in Sheila Hancock now Chief Executive of First Milk. Ash mentioned
there the green transition. With this volatility how can farmers invest to make
that transition a reality? I think it's really important for farmers to look at
how can they build resilience on farm. You know moving towards a greener agenda,
regenerative farming in particular I would say looks at how can they reduce the
reliance on artificial inputs, how can they reduce their reliance on fertilizer
that has been very highly volatile in pricing, how can they reduce the reliance
on imported foods by growing more home growing proteins, how can they reduce the
reliance on energy by putting up more renewable energy sources and that will
require investment on farm and a change of operating practice but that will help
them mitigate the impacts of volatility. And in the future would you see a
situation where farm gate prices could be used to reward sustainable farming
behavior? I think there's an element of incentivization to change practice and
certainly you know farmers need to be rewarded for making changes on farms even
farming policy is changing now but consumers also I think should recognize that
these efforts that farmers make does come at a cost that requires investment.
Sheila Hancock, Chief Executive of First Milk and next week we'll be taking a
more detailed look at dairy farming. Now pig farmers are still losing money on
every pig they sell for slaughter despite record high prices. The latest figures
from the industry body the AHDB show farmers have been losing money on pigs
since late 2020 although losses have dropped from a high of 58 pounds a pig to
17 pounds a pig by the end of last year. Well as we've been reporting for the
past few years this is because of a combination of a shortage of butchers at
abattoirs leading to pigs backing up on farms and increases in the cost of
heating sheds and feeding the animals. DEFRA is due to report back on its review
of the pork supply chain soon so we thought this week would be a good time to
take a look at this area of farming and what happens next. Anna Hill spoke to
Chief Executive of the National Pig Association Lizzie Wilson. Price has been
going up steadily so we're now at 206.39 pence per kilo and that's an
unprecedented high versus you know this time last year I think it's you know 30,
30, 40 pence price difference there. However cost production is still very high.
Wheat prices are still around 2, 30, 2, 40 pounds a kilo and that's forecast to
remain pretty static to be honest. The wheat price is important isn't it because
that's what pigs are fed on. Absolutely so feed price accounts for around you
know 65 to 70 percent of cost of production. Sawyer is extortionately expensive
at the minute so Sawyer is well over 500 pounds a ton and then you've got
everything else on top of that so you've got your energy, you've got your labor
costs, you've got general inflation on everything. So sadly even though the pig
prices is really robust at the minute it's still not enough to ensure that
producers are making a margin and then when you consider that it's off the back
of two years of continual financial hemorrhaging you know that's a really big
black hole to try and backfill and it's going to take some time to recover from
that. When times were very tough some people did go out of business didn't they?
Does that mean there's less pork being produced in the UK? Yeah there's a
definite tightening in supply and that's really for two reasons as you've
mentioned that people have gone out of business because their financial
situation just wasn't sustainable anymore but we've also seen off the back of
the heatwave last summer a serious impact on sow fertility so the number of pigs
going out the farm door is down by sort of between 7 and 10 percent and that's
fairly representative across the board really. The government's carrying out a
review into the supply chain as well with a view to reforming it so what's
happening with that and what do you want to see? So we're expecting the initial
summary of responses very shortly hopefully about the end of this month
hopefully we'll be able to make progress quite quickly from there on in. We'd
like some sort of legislation to underpin new pig contracts so that will allow
producers to negotiate much better and fairer terms with processes in particular
and that will hopefully incorporate some sort of pricing mechanism and also an
effective dispute resolution mechanism as well. We also want better forecasting
and we also want retailers and pork buyers to make better use of the entire pig
carcass so some supermarkets will buy the entire carcass and utilize it all. The
fresh pork cuts but then also processed meat on pizza toppings or sandwich
fillings or you know within sausage rolls and I appreciate not every retailer
can do that but they can definitely better utilize the carcass in comparison to
how they do now. What would you say is the temperature of the pig sector at the
moment? I would say it's at the very start of recovery. Producers are a little
more buoyant but they're still very very cautious. It's going to be a good
couple of years I would suggest until you see us back to where we were a couple
of years ago in a far more positive position. Lizzie Wilson there from the
National Pig Association. That's it from us. I'm Charlotte Smith. The studio
manager is Susie Robbins and the producer for BBC Audio in Bristol is Heather
Symons. Now over to the BBC Weather Centre for the Farming Today five-day
forecast. Yes indeed it is Ben Rich here at the BBC Weather Centre. Good morning
to you. It's been a very dry February so far. Parts of southern England have had
only 10% of the rainfall they'd normally expect during the month. It's only
northern Scotland that has seen anything like the average amount of rainfall and
that mainly dry theme does continue through this week as we move out of February
and on into March. High pressure will remain centred over Scotland. That will
keep most parts of the UK largely dry. There will be some showers. Daytime
temperatures will tend to be around the average for the time of year but
overnight frosts remain likely in places where skies will stay clear. But
through today we will see some clear skies so some sunny spells but also large
areas of cloud and right now we've got a lot of cloud drifting in across eastern
parts of England. That is producing some showers actually and as we go through
the day those large areas of cloud will spread westwards across England, Wales
and Northern Ireland still with one or two showers possible most places will
stay dry. Eastern Scotland will also be quite cloudy. Western Scotland is likely
to have the best of the sunshine. It will be breezy around some southern and
eastern coasts, lighter winds elsewhere and temperatures between six and nine
degrees. Tonight we will continue to see some areas of cloud, equally some clear
spells. A few light showers are possible but most places will be dry and where
the skies stay clearest especially across northwest Scotland temperatures could
fall as low as minus 4 Celsius but cloudy areas will avoid a frost. Tomorrow
again there'll be large areas of cloud, some sunny spells, most places dry but
southern counties of England are likely to see some sharp showers drifting
westwards during the afternoon. For Wednesday, Thursday and Friday the forecast
remains essentially the same. Large areas of cloud, the odd shower but most
places dry with some sunny breaks. Daytime temperatures generally around six to
nine degrees, some overnight frost possible. There is the chance of some rain as
we head into next week. Ben, thank you very much indeed. And now Tweet of the
Day. David Attenborough presents the dipper by a fast-flowing stream. On a cold
winter's day when few birds are singing, the bright rambling song of a dipper by
a rushing stream is always a surprise. Dippers sing in winter because that's
when the males begin marking out their stretch of water, their early breeders.
Dippers are rather like giant wrens, dark brown above with a stubby tail, a
white bib and chestnut belly. They breed along fast-flowing well-oxygenated
streams and rivers in the north and west of the UK. Here you'll see them perched
on stones in mid-current, their porter shapes bobbing nervously as if they were
on hinges. In order to feed, dippers need to tackle the torrents head-on and
dive in, no mean feat for a buoyant creature no bigger than a blackbird. In
search of fly larvae and freshwater shrimps, dippers use their wings to propel
themselves along the stream bed and then walk by gripping stones with their
claws. To rise to the surface again, the dipper simply lets go and floats
upwards.