TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC Radio 4, it's 10 o'clock. Welcome to 60 Minutes of News and Conversation
with me, Carolyn Quinn and my guests. This is the Westminster Hour. The main
news tonight, the European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen is to meet
Rishi Sunak in Berkshire tomorrow, with expectations rising that they'll
finalise a new post-Brexit trading deal for Northern Ireland. Nearly 60 people,
including children and a baby, are now known to have died after a boat-carrying
migrants sank in stormy weather off the coast of southern Italy. Israeli and
Palestinian security chiefs have held a rare meeting and pledged to take
immediate steps to end the recent wave of violence, but there'd be more clashes
in the West Bank tonight. Coming up, could we be on the brink of a Northern
Ireland deal? Does Rishi Sunak have enough in his kit bag to persuade the Ulster
Unionists and his own hardline Brexitors to back it? The former Prime Minister
Sir John Major tells us that easing trade with Northern Ireland and getting its
political institutions back up and running should be prioritised above
everything else. They talk of democracy. Democracy is thrown away when that
assembly is not sitting. We need them back. I'll be discussing all this with my
panel, the former Justice Secretary Sir Robert Buckland, the Shadow Cabinet
Minister Thangam Debeneer and the Director of the Think Tank, UK in a Changing
Europe, Professor Anand Menom and Isabel Hardman, Assistant Editor of The
Spectator, will be our expert guide to another big week at Westminster. That's
all coming up after the news read for us tonight by Alan Smith. The Prime
Minister Rishi Sunak is to meet the President of the European Commission Ursula
von der Leyen in Berkshire tomorrow with the expectation that they will try to
finalise a deal on new post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. In
a joint statement, they said they would look for practical solutions for the
range of complex challenges around the Northern Ireland Protocol. Conservative
and Labour MPs have been told to come into Parliament tomorrow, while a special
meeting of European Union ambassadors has been called for the afternoon. Our
political correspondent Ian Watson reports. A deal with EU has seemed to be
within grasp for days, but somehow, rather like the horizon, the closer
ministers seem to get, the further it moved away. But no longer. In the
strongest signal yet that an agreement on Northern Ireland is imminent, the
President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen will travel to London
tomorrow for the talks that could seal the deal. The Justice Secretary and
former Brexit Secretary Dominic Raab has offered a glimpse of what has been
discussed. It's likely that goods going from Great Britain to Northern Ireland
and remaining there would be exempt from checks. But there'd be no exception for
goods going via Northern Ireland to the Republic and therefore entering the EU.
He's also suggested that politicians at Stormont could have a say on any future
EU rules that could affect Northern Ireland. Mr Raab told the BBC's Laura
Kunzberg programme that all this could resolve issues with the existing deal.
I'm doing the right thing the right way for all communities of Northern Ireland,
protecting the Good Friday Agreement, which has come under pressure from the
Northern Ireland Protocol. Frankly, if you ask about the politics, fulfilling
our manifesto commitment on Brexit. I think in all those three areas what the
Prime Minister is seeking to do as a statesman is get the deal that will resolve
these issues. But getting a deal with the EU could actually be the easier of the
Prime Minister's tasks. Much trickier will be winning the support of the
Democratic Unionist Party who are warning that the wrong deal could deepen
divisions. And if the DUP doesn't like the detail of the deal, they'll continue
to refuse to rejoin a power-sharing government in Northern Ireland. The Prime
Minister has some work to do to convince some of his own MPs of the merits of a
deal too. Mark Frolenswa is the Chairman of the ERG Group of Eurosceptic Tory
MPs and he told Sky News he had concerns about a continuing role for the EU in
Northern Ireland. What we want is a situation where EU law is expunged from
Northern Ireland so it is treated on the same basis as England, Scotland and
Wales. Speaking on this programme, the former Prime Minister Sir John Major said
that the occasional involvement of the European Court of Justice in resolving
some disputes between companies should not stop an agreement being made, arguing
that democracy was being thrown away while Northern Ireland still has no sitting
government. MPs at Westminster haven't yet been promised a vote on the deal but
Labour has signalled support. The shadow foreign secretary David Lamey said any
deal would be better than the current one and would be in a national interest.
The Deputy Prime Minister Dominic Raab says he will resign if an inquiry finds
that he bullied civil servants. Eight formal complaints have been made against
him. The union which represents civil servants, the FDA, has separately called
on the health and safety executive to investigate claims of widespread bullying
in Whitehall. Speaking to Laura Coonsberg, Mr Raab denied he was a bully. He was
also asked whether he had ever felt that at times he shouldn't have reacted in a
certain way. Look, in terms of working staff falling short of any of the
impropriety you refer to, look of course we learn lessons as we go and that's
part of the relationship with civil servants but I'm confident that I behaved
professionally throughout and as I say, I think actually the vast lion's share
of the time, the vast majority of cases and the time we spend together, civil
servants and ministers work very effectively together. But the General Secretary
of the FDA Union Dave Penman dismissed Mr Raab's comments. The picture he paints
is that everything's fine and the civil service and the relationship between
ministers and civil servants is okay. That's not the picture that civil servants
speak of. That's not their experience. One in six are saying that they've
experienced bullying or harassment or witnessed that in the last 12 months alone
across 20 government departments. Nearly 60 people, including a baby and several
young children, are known to have drowned after a boat carrying migrants sank
off the southern coast of Italy. The vessel broke up in rough seas near the
coastal town of Crotonne in the Calabria region. Here's our Europe regional
editor Danny Eberhard. Initial reports indicate the migrants are from
Afghanistan, Pakistan, the Middle East and Somalia but it's still not clear how
many people were on board when the boat broke up. It's believed to have crossed
from western Turkey on what's known as the Calabrian route. It's lucrative for
people smugglers and the Calabrian mafia, the Indrangata, is said to be
involved. Italy's Prime Minister, Giorgio Maloney, has expressed her deep sorrow
at the tragedy which she's blamed on people traffickers. The UN is calling for
immediate action to prevent such horrific events. Israeli and Palestinian
officials meeting in Yemen have announced they're committed to taking immediate
steps to end a recent surge in violence. As the rare summit took place, two
Israelis were shot dead in the occupied West Bank. Our Middle East correspondent
Yoland Nell has sent this report from Jerusalem. This is said to be the first
time in years that Israeli and Palestinian security chiefs have sat down
together at such a meeting. It's remarkable that after almost a decade without
direct peace talks, the two sides said in a statement that they'd work towards a
just and lasting peace. With anxieties high about an escalation in the Islamic
holy month of Ramadan, which begins in late March, Israel made a commitment to
stop discussing new settlement building for four months. In return, it's
understood that the Palestinians will not take action against Israel at the UN.
No details were given about what would be done to prevent further violence, but
the challenge was made clear during the talks, as two Jewish settlers were
fatally shot while driving near Nablus. Already too far right Israeli cabinet
ministers, key partners in Benjamin Netanyahu's government have rejected the
statement, which has also been denounced by Palestinian armed factions. Tonight
Israeli settlers in the occupied West Bank set fire to Palestinian houses, shops
and vehicles near to where the two Israelis were shot dead. The Palestinian Red
Cross said about a hundred people had been treated, many had inhaled tear gas
fired by Israeli security forces. The former Environment Secretary George
Eustace has said shortages of some fruit and vegetables in the UK could continue
for another month. Representatives from the major supermarkets are due to meet
ministers tomorrow to discuss the issue, our business correspondent Esselk Karr
reports. Retailers and the government have said extreme weather in Spain and
Morocco is the main reason for the shortages of products like tomatoes,
cucumbers and peppers. But UK farmers and growers have highlighted that
production here has also been hit by other problems like high energy costs and
labour shortages since Brexit. Today on the Sunday with Laura Coonsberg
programme, George Eustace, who was the Environment Secretary until last year,
defended the government's approach. It's been much different than the government
could have done in recent months and there's nothing they can do immediately.
We're going to have three or four weeks of this and the supermarkets have got to
work to get it right. But longer term there are things we should be doing. We
should be committing to onshore production, so glass house production of
cucumbers and tomatoes, we should be trying to build that here. We should have a
more enlightened approach to labour. Speaking alongside the former minister, the
chef and founder of the Oaxaca restaurant chain, Thomasina Myers, described the
current problems as the tip of the iceberg. No one's really admitting that our
current food system is completely broken. There's a propaganda that the food
system somehow miraculously provide a cheap food for all. But the very system
which it depends is rife with insecurities, whether it's to do the climate
biodiversity or public health. The government says the UK's supply chain is
highly resilient and well equipped to cope with disruption. Tomorrow the farming
minister is expected to meet retailers to discuss how to get supplies back to
normal. In sport Manchester United have won the league cup, their first trophy
in six years, beating Newcastle at Wembley. Casemiro opened the scoring in the
33rd minute before a lone goal from Sven Botman sealed a 2-0 win for United.
Speaking after the match, their manager Eric Tenhag said his team had done it
the hard way. Final way to win, I think that is also what we did today because
Newcastle is a good opponent, it's a difficult opponent to play against. But we
are difficult as well and we can transform also in a style they don't like.
Elsewhere Celtic beat Rangers 2-1 to win the Scottish League Cup, while in the
Premier League Chelsea lost 2-0 to Tottenham. In the Women's FA Cup, the holders
Chelsea beat Arsenal 2-0 to reach the quarter-finals. In the Six Nations, France
managed to cling on to beat Scotland in Paris 32-21. And in cricket, Australia
beat the hosts South Africa to become the Women's T20 World Cup champions. Thank
you very much, Alan. You're listening to the Westminster Hour with me, Carolyn
Quinn, for the last time in this seat before I sign off after 36 years working
full-time at the BBC. The past 16 of them, in fact, here with you on Sunday
nights running all year round. You know, our proud boast for the Westminster
Hour is that we never close, we don't have recesses and nor will we close after
I head off. Your Sunday night briefing will remain as it is in the hands of my
brilliant colleagues. Anyway, enough about me. Let's talk about my panel. I'm
delighted to have four very familiar figures gathered around the table in the
studio with me. They are Sir Robert Buckland, Justice Secretary and Lord
Chancellor in Boris Johnson's government, and then Welsh Secretary under Liz
Truss. With her departure, he returned to the backbenches and he represents
South Swindom. Hello to you. Hello. Labours Thangam Devaner is the shadow leader
of the Commons and she's also the MP for Bristol West. Hello. Anad Menon is well
known as the director of the UK Interchanging Europe think tank. He's also
professor of European politics and foreign affairs at King's College London. And
we can ask him anything we like about football. Isabel Hardman is the assistant
editor of the Spectator. So welcome to you all. Thanks for being with me this
evening. And quite a day because Isabel, earlier today, we thought we might be
bringing you news of a deal on Northern Ireland this evening. We're not quite
there yet, are we? Though Rishi Suna has been in intensive talks with his EU
counterparts trying to fix the problems with trade that are caused by having a
border down the Irish Sea, a result, of course, of the protocol that was
negotiated by Boris Johnson, which resulted in Northern Ireland remaining in the
EU single market for goods. Now, it does look like things are moving. Could you
take us a bit through the choreography what we think might happen tomorrow?
Yeah, so it looks like tomorrow is going to be the big day. We've got Ursula von
der Leyen coming to London, possibly somewhere outside of London. Her diary has
been suggesting maybe Windsor. And that's partly because there had been some
chatter in the run up to this that Rishi Suna was going to try to get the king
involved in what might have been called the Windsor Agreement. Now, that's
looking a bit less clear now. But either way, the plan is if things go well for
an agreement to be signed off by the leaders, and then for Rishi Suna to take
this to cabinet where he presents it to his ministers, and then for there to be
a statement in Parliament and a press conference as well where questions are
answered. Now, that's choreography. At that point, it moves into the sort of the
freestyle, possibly break dancing stage of Brexit where you have if you want to
imagine the DUP break dancing, here's your possibly only opportunity where the
DUP say whether they are signed up to it, whether they're okay with it in some
way, or whether they outright reject it, and where it is made clear whether MPs
are going to get a vote on the deal. That's been something that's been
suggested, but not fully confirmed yet. And when we find out what certain rogue
operators such as Boris Johnson want to do now that the details are out. Because
he's been saying don't drop the protocol bill, which sort of gives you leverage
and allows you to pull the plug if you don't like what's going on. Yeah, and to
do so unilaterally as well. And that's something that Rishi Sunak, and I'm sure
Robert will have plenty to say on this, would like to or has suggested he would
like to dispose of it currently, as I understand it paused in its progress
through Parliament. But there's, there is an appetite in some quarters to keep
it and I mean, quarters of government. But there's a very concerted push from
the backbenchers from Boris Johnson from the European Research Group from Suella
Braverman, the Home Secretary, to keep it. And the Home Secretary in particular
What is your initial reaction to what's emerged today? Well, we haven't yet seen
the detail. It looks as if the deal will reach into issues on VAT and state aid,
state subsidies as well. And if you match that to the Northern Ireland Protocol
Bill, there are parts in that bill that deal precisely with those issues. So
that together with what I'll call the Red and Green Lane issue, which I think
everybody's familiar with, seems to me to be quite a potentially comprehensive
deal. We're left therefore with what has become a teremic issue, namely the
jurisdiction of the CJU, the Court of Justice in Luxembourg. Reading the DUP
seven tests last year, there's no specific mention of that court. I think the
reality is with regard to the reach of that jurisdiction is that even if it
remains, it will be vanishingly small. I don't think it should be a deal
breaker. I want to see a deal tomorrow. I want that bill dropped. Yes, you want
the Northern Ireland Protocol Bill dropped and Thangam, would you support that
idea? Get the bill out of the way. Do you think Rishi Sunak also deserves some
credit for making this happen? Well, let's start with the fact that yes, I do
want the Protocol Bill dropped. I agree with Robert. I think there's a
vanishingly small justification for it. It was always problematic. And I think
we need to play a game of good faith now. And if there is a deal that we want to
vote for it in the Labour Party, if there will be a vote, I mean, it's, as
Isabel said, not yet clear. But that's because we believe in doing things for
the national interest and putting country before partying and Keir set that out
very, very clearly. I do feel that this is something that Rishi Sunak could have
been putting in the hard yards of work for the past few months instead of
throwing it all together at the end. However, we did need to move on the
protocol. If there is progress, we will vote to support it. If that does end up
being a vote. And people have just had years of uncertainty. Businesses have had
years of uncertainty. They were misled. I think that's the kindest way of
putting it. So it's time this got sorted out. And, and Rishi Sunak has come in.
There does feel as if there's a change of attitude, maybe an openness to
discussion. I mean, we don't know if this will be accepted or will be acceptable
to some in his party. But what about from the European perspective? Do they feel
that Rishi Sunak is a man that they could do business with more than say, Liz
Trust before him or Boris Johnson before her? That's certainly what you hear
from European circles that actually we have a prime minister who we're going to
place a lot of faith in. And if what Robert says about VAT and state aid is
true, then European Union are placing considerable amounts of faith in us. It
seems like the prime minister has won significant concessions on that. So I
think the mood music has changed. And I think it's it's almost the opposite of
what a lot of the sort of hardcore Brexitors are arguing. It is because of good
faith and a sense that you can trust the prime minister that these concessions
have been forthcoming rather than because you're you're waving around the sword
of Damocles in the sense in the sense of the protocol bill. Look, way back when
when the troubles were raging in Northern Ireland, an attempt was made to open
up dialogue with the paramilitaries by John Major's government. Now that
decision was fought with difficulty did in fact pave the way to the Downey
Street Declaration and eventually the Good Friday Agreement under Tony Blair.
The assembly at Stormont and the executive resulted from that agreement. And
they have, of course, been suspended for the past year because of the problems
with the operation of the Northern Ireland Protocol. I sat down with John Major
last week for a wide ranging chat. We'll hear a bit more of it later. But first,
on the subject of Northern Ireland, he made clear that he had had no involvement
in the current negotiations. He doesn't know the detail, but his views on the
need for resolution were pretty forthright. As far as trade is concerned, the
deal that Mr Johnson and Lord Frost did was pretty poor. It was a pretty poor
negotiation. And after having regarded it as a triumph and taken the plaudits
for it, it was barely weeks before they were denouncing it. But of course,
blaming the European Union for it. So there is a need for some reform of the
agreement. The European Union are offering a good deal of reform. The UK have
made some helpful suggestions about red and green exit points for trade, for
example. The DUP would like the protocol rewritten. Well, it depends exactly
what they mean by that. It's not at all clear to me what they mean by that. But
what is actually turning out to be a particularly difficult point is the
question of what happens with trade disputes. The European Union insists that
the European Court of Justice should be involved. And that is a neuralgic point
for many members of parliament in the UK, particularly the European Research
Group wing of the Tory Party, and also for the DUP. This neuralgic situation has
left Northern Ireland without an executive and without a power sharing assembly
for well over a year. And it could be a good deal longer. Trade isn't the only
problem in Northern Ireland. They've got real problems with health, with
education, with all sorts of other things. And they need that executive back in
operation. Now the extent to which the European Court of Justice would be
involved would be in determining disputes between companies. They're not going
to overturn the constitution. Their involvement would be tiny, partial and
occasional. And if we can get in a reform all the trade changes we need, the
easier access for trade into Northern Ireland, then the fact that there will be
a minute occasional involvement of the European Court of Justice really ought
not to stop an agreement being made. They talk of democracy. Democracy is thrown
away when that assembly is not sitting. We need them back. Sir John Major,
Robert Buckland, you were listening intently to that. He says a minor role for
the ECJ is worth it if it restores government. Do you agree? He's absolutely
right. Sir John gave evidence before the Northern Ireland Select Committee,
which I'm a member the other day. And that sense of the generation that led by
example that made the concessions, that lent into each other and made the
compromises is one that we've really got to grasp now. This is no time for lines
in the sand and in transigence. This is about people's livelihoods, businesses,
citizens in Northern Ireland. And the absence of an executive, I can tell you
I've seen from my own experience, is having a baleful effect on public services
in Northern Ireland. And I think it's absolutely incumbent upon everybody
involved now to, if we can get through this position with the protocol, to not
make the perfect the enemy of the good, to get to an agreement and then for
everybody to take on the reins of responsibility that devolved government gives
everybody. And the DUP have a moment to seize an opportunity. And I wish them
well in doing that. And the DUP though, they feel very sure that they want the
EU to have far less of a say over what happens in Northern Ireland. And for
them, do you not think that everything they've said so far means that they would
not accept even a minor role for the European Court of Justice? I'm not sure
that's true. I mean, if you look at those seven tests, for instance, they talk
about the people of Northern Ireland having a say over the rules that govern
them. A say is not a vote. And you could imagine some kind of consultation
mechanism that allows the people or politicians of Northern Ireland to comment
on draft EU legislation, for instance. So giving them a say over future EU laws.
I think those tests were quite carefully drafted to give them some wiggle room.
What I would say though, is at the end of the day, the point of the protocol is
to, in the context of Brexit, avoid a border in the island of Ireland. And
whatever tweaks are made to that document, there is going to be some residual,
if you like, constitutional strangeness where EU institutions have some role in
Northern Ireland. That means there will be some residual role for the court, and
there will be a role for EU law, for EU rules, because without that, you'd need
that border. So if you're a constitutional purist and you say it's everything or
nothing, there will be something to object to in whatever comes out tomorrow.
But if as Robert says, you say, okay, I prefer less of that, but actually my
priority is to make Northern Ireland function to get an executive working and to
get trade flowing, you might find a way to accept it. But we shouldn't kid
ourselves that this is removing the role of EU law and EU institutions in
Northern Ireland, because to have no border on the island, you have to have
those there. We'd love to have heard the view of the DUP, but obviously they
really want to look at this deal. They don't really want to talk about it
publicly before they even give a thumbs up or a thumbs down. They will be poring
over it. And they may indeed make a ruchisounac sweat for a little while,
Fangum. Now, they want to see the text of the deal, but Labour we know are
committed, as you said already, to supporting it. So you could be instrumental
in getting it through Parliament, couldn't you? Well, I think we need to respect
the DUP's right to have a look at the deal and to scrutinise it properly. It's
hugely important to them. It's incredibly important. And that level of
statecraft that's been needed to try and put this together is something that I
wish we'd seen for months ago. But we've got there now, hopefully. I think the
DUP need to be given time to do that. I think there shouldn't be artificial
deadlines put on them to rush through it. I think we need to see that time
taken. But we do also need to know that the ruchisounac is prepared to work with
all parties, and that includes the Labour Party. Cleo offered last week at Prime
Minister's Questions that we would vote if needed. If there was to be a vote, we
would vote to get it over the line if he needs it. And I have to say, I think
ruchisounac was singularly ungracious about that offer. But I'm hoping that now
we're here, we're all able to put some pragmatism in and some statecraft and say
that if there is a deal, if it needs a vote to get over the line, the Labour
Party is prepared to do that work and to help get it over the line. Isabel,
where do you think that then leaves ruchisounac? And where does this rank in
terms of challenges for him? Because before now, he's faced well moderate
rebellions, but he's been able to quell them by concessions. This is much, much
more than that. There's a lot of political legwork. Do you think he can persuade
his colleagues, the ERG in Parliament and the DUP? It is very hard work. And
it's not just the political legwork, it's also the personal legwork. And one of
the mistakes that so many Conservative leaders make is neglecting the
interpersonal relationships with, frankly, a very sensitive group of people who
need quite a lot of attention and FaceTime, Conservative MPs. I think Labour MPs
have their own issues, but I'd say that they tend not to sort of need the
approval and appreciation of their leader in quite the same way as Tory MPs do.
And this is one of the ingredients, I think, in some of the discomforts over the
past week is that the ERG and the DUP don't feel they were consulted early
enough. When I spoke to members of the ERG last week who'd been in to see the
Prime Minister for briefings at the start of the week in particular, they'd
found him very impatient with them. And he does have a real sense of urgency
about this. He wants to get on with it. He's very aware of the Good Friday
Agreement anniversary for one thing. But he also, and lots of other figures
across government feel this, they want to get on to a more mature relationship
with Europe and the European Union across the board. And they feel that
everything that they're doing on Ukraine is being held back by the ongoing
negotiations over Northern Ireland. And they basically want to move on. So there
is an impatience with the general situation, but being impatient with individual
members can quite easily seem to be insulting their intelligence, which is the
last thing you want to do with Conservative MPs. Well, that April anniversary,
the 25th anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement, we're told the American
president Joe Biden sees that as a crucial date. But Robert, we hear Boris
Johnson wasn't that fast when you mentioned that to him. And if we look at the
front page of the Independent tomorrow, Boris is condemned for F star star star
US outburst. He swore and you were in conversation with him. What was that all
about? Well, you know, I do have an iron rule about not talking about personal
conversations. It's been reported everywhere. Yes, I've seen that. And we did
have a conversation. We had an exchange of views. But as usual between Boris and
me, it is a cordial, a frank exchange of views. I disagree with him about the
bill. We were having a conversation about the United States. His point is that
my view is that I think unlocking this deal shows that first of all, it's a test
of Rishi's leadership. And I believe he will be up to it. And I think he's
showing outstanding grit in doing this and grasping the nettle, as I said to him
last week. And secondly, I think it unlocks a better relationship, not just with
the EU, but with the US as well. And I think the geopolitics of this is
incredibly important. If we are shown to be good stewards of strand one of the
Belfast Good Friday Agreement, north, south, as Anne quite rightly said, and
east, west, which is strand three, then we are demonstrating to the Americans
and others that this government is responsible and mature and sensible. So you
were arguing it was necessary to, you know, a good way of cementing relations
with the US and encouraging him to back the deal. And then he was overheard
replying F the Americans. I think his point, and it is one I think that is worth
making, is that the President has said to him in the past that the US are very
reluctant to intervene directly in the sovereign affairs of another country.
They don't want to start preaching to other countries. And that was the point I
think he was making. But ultimately, I think all of us knew at the time we made
the deal in 2019, I was in the cabinet at the time, we were in a very difficult
position, we had to get on with getting a deal, we were hitting that deadline.
And what was agreed with regard to Northern Ireland was inevitably going to have
to be revisited sooner or later. And we're in a position now where I'm hoping we
can get final resolution. But here's the thing about my long experience with the
EU, I suspect that this will continue, there will be a continuing negotiation
about other aspects of our relationship. And you know what, that's a good thing,
because that's mature governments talking to each other bilaterally about what I
hope will be a developing relationship, particularly on the TCA, the trade
agreement that I want to see deepened in the years ahead. Did you persuade Boris
Johnson? Well, I think we agreed to differ on this issue. He wants the bill to
proceed. I think that it's a dead letter, I think worse than that. I think it's
a poison pill that could prejudice our relations with other countries if we
continue to persist with this unilateralist approach. And And? And it's
reminding ourselves that actually the protocol as negotiated by Boris Johnson is
still the document that we're working to hear. So what's happened isn't a
rewriting of the protocol, it is simply a reworking of how it's going to be
operationalised. Isn't it also worth reminding us all? I mean, maybe we don't
need reminding, but Boris said something maybe not quite so sweary, but equally
unproductive about what people could do with with forms to fill in if they were
told to fill in forms, moving goods from east to west. Now you read the
protocol, you knew what was in it too, Robert, we all knew what was in it. And
we all knew that, as you said, I remember being grilled by Andrew Neelan
submitting that there was going to be paperwork. So that was unhelpful. It was
deep enough. And that's why I meant by people and businesses being misled. And I
think that was incredibly unhelpful of Mr Johnson, because it meant that we had
more instability than was necessary. It's led to the Northern Ireland Assembly
not sitting for some time at such a waste. Anna, look at it from the EU
perspective and what they did as a result of it. Were they being overzealous
perhaps in implementation of the protocol and have they really made the sort of
concessions now that if they'd made them back then it would have eased all of
this? I think that's quite possibly the case. I mean, the EU have moved their
position on how the protocol should work. And I think the realisation, the sort
of reality on the ground of some of the problems that traders were facing in
doing east-west trade weren't clear in their details at the time that this was
signed. And I think the EU have come to recognise A, that there are real
problems here that we need to find a way to iron out, and that B, some of those
problems are impacting on Northern Ireland and neither side wants that to
happen. So yeah, I think the EU have shifted their position, but they haven't
shifted their position on the legal text. What they've done is say we will find
doubtless creative legal ways to do things differently using the same text. What
they refuse to do from day one is revisit that text. What about a vote? Will
there be a vote in the Commons? It was interesting, wasn't it, hearing Dominic
Raab this morning saying MPs will have the opportunity to express themselves on
the deal. Does anybody know what that means? To develop Annan's point, I think
Annan's absolutely right about the nature of any agreement. It may well be a
series of understandings, obviously documented agreements between the EU and the
UK. They don't necessarily change the text, but modify the way in which it is
operated. So already we're seeing a big question mark about whether procedurally
you would need a vote. What do you mean because it might come in different
stages? I don't forget that it is a prerogative power for the government to
negotiate at intergovernmental level. But here's the second point. The E-
withdrawal Act that was passed in 2020 amended the 2018 Act that I did a lot of
work on to allow these international agreements to have direct effect in
domestic UK law. Now, I don't think from my reading of it that any such
agreement that might be reached tomorrow would need formal legislation either of
a primary or secondary nature. But here's the thing. I've been long enough in
this particular issue of Brexit to know that parliament will find a way. Yeah.
Everybody is talking about that. This house has now adjourned. They will find a
way. And even though John Burko is no longer in the chair, I'm pretty sure that
the Speaker will want to allow parliament to have the time to debate this
thoroughly. So would that mean a yes or no, though, to the deal? Probably not
from what you're saying. Well, it wouldn't be bind. I mean, that's the point. If
you keep the same deal, your international treaty remains as it is and doesn't
need to be re ratified. So there's no legal reason to have a vote on any of
this. There are good political reasons, not least the accusation of cowardice if
he doesn't. And I'd suspect if he doesn't, the Labour Party will be finding a
good use for an opposition day. I mean, if Labour won, what would you want?
Well, I mean, we could that is one option, but I think there'll be other MPs of
another party who will be scurrying around for the clerks tomorrow, finding out,
well, what can I do to get a vote? I think there will be members of the ERG.
There'll be other parts of parliament of the House of Commons who will want to
have a say. So there are many ways of doing that. And yes, we've used opposition
days before. I see. The best way for a prime minister to ensure that he has a
really embarrassing bloody parliamentary vote is to avoid having a vote and
avoid giving MPs that opportunity because MPs hate nothing more than feeling
that they are being ignored and dismissed. And rightly so, because parliament
should be taken seriously. I found it hilarious that Dominic Raab this morning
said, I mean, I don't think things really go through parliament on the dot. I
thought, have you paid any attention to legislation? But MPs still don't like
that. Isabel is absolutely right. I think if I was advising the business
managers and the prime minister, I'd say, let's have a debate. Let's clear a day
very soon and have that vote. It can be indicative. It's not binding in that
sense. And government should be quite insistent about that. And give everyone
time to have their say over it. Of course. And the result is indicative. It
doesn't mean that therefore somehow it has the sort of tactical advantage that I
know the Labour Party want to get because they want to be able to say they've
divided the Conservative Party on the floor, the House of Commons. Having a
proper debate doesn't mean that. Well, you know, look, I thought we'd agreed
that this is about the people of Northern Ireland. Yes, absolutely. Not about
game playing. No, I absolutely agree. I was slightly, I have a slight pit of
dread in my stomach then at the word indicative. I've got all sorts of 2019
flashbacks. But seriously, we're all completely triggered. But seriously, I
mean, I just think it would look incredibly weak of Rishi Sunak to end up being
forced to have a vote. And so, you know, I hope that he finds a way to make
something a bit more meaningful because otherwise you're just spending ages sort
of playing whack-a-mole parliamentary whack-a-mole, trying to deal with this
group over here and then having to deal with this group over here. And then
along comes another party that manages to get another vote through somehow by
some means. I heard one expert today, a commentator saying that the DUP may take
their time over this an awful long time. They may not say anything definitively
until May the 18th, the date of the Northern Ireland council elections. But that
was one person's view, who knows? But look, and I'm with you just looking into
the distance beyond, you know, the horizon, talking about the horizon science
programme, student exchanges, dealing with the small boats issue. Do you think
if Rishi Sunak has established a better relationship with the EU, there could be
further rapprochements on issues like that? Absolutely. And both with the EU and
with member states, remember, there's a very big summit coming up with the
French president Macron in early March. That will go a lot better if there's
been progress made on the protocol. And with the EU, horizon has been held to
ransom over the standoff with the protocol. So I think we know that's on the
table. If the protocol row is solved, then horizon is open and both sides want
participation in that. But I don't know how far Rishi Sunak wants to go. But it
strikes me that one of the issues that's driving this at the moment is when it
comes to public opinion at the moment, Brexit is being seen more and more not as
a cultural issue, which perhaps it was in 2019. But as an economic issue, Brexit
is something that is impacting on our economy. And because the focus of this
government is dealing with the economic crisis, any wins you can get, whether
it's horizon, whether it's making trade easier with the European Union, they're
going to seize with both hands. So there is a broader agenda, I think, going
forward. But you've got a mixture of views, obviously, very strong views in your
party. And I'm very aware that we haven't got a firm Brexit on the panel this
week. Jacob Rees-Mogg was with us last week and was expressing his views. So,
you know, I want to make sure that we're taking in the views. You understand the
concerns, do you? I mean, you voted Remain, but you were then in the government
that I do. And I respected the result of the referendum and I helped deliver a
Brexit deal and work with Jacob and work with many colleagues in the ERG. And I
absolutely understand where they're coming from. You know, if Brexit was to mean
anything, it was about sovereignty and it was about that independence, if you
like. But I think Alan's point about economics is a real one. You know, people
are very concerned about the performance of the British economy. They wanted to
do better. And seizing any opportunity that we have on research, whether it's
Horizon or indeed being able to take the initiative on what is a huge political
issue at the moment for the government, the small boats crisis, seems to me to
be vital. And I think, here's the thing, I think relations with Paris and with
the French administration are incredibly, inestimably better than they were this
time last year or even six months ago. I think trust has been restored. I think
that the attitude of the French government has helped unlock the negotiations in
the EU. And that's why things are dramatically different now from June last
year, when the Northern Ireland Protocol Bill was introduced. It is no longer
the only way that we can get what we want. And therefore, the legal underpinning
for that bill, therefore the argument of necessity seems to me to have
evaporated. And that's why chiefly this bill now should no longer proceed. And
you will disagree with you in your own party, but that is to be pursued at a
later date. Now, look, we heard Sir John Major's thoughts on the Northern
Ireland Protocol negotiations earlier. I joined Westminster as a very junior
reporter back in 1989. So I saw the last moments of Margaret Thatcher's
administration, but it was John Major who was the first prime minister that I
actually got to interview. So I thought it'd be rather nice to round things off
by talking to him again. Now, we reflected on how politics has changed over the
past 30 years. I put to him that back in the 1990s, there was still a generation
in parliament who'd been shaped by the Second World War. Those politicians had
served in war and it had been the biggest scar on their lives as it was for
everybody who was alive at that time. And they saw the importance of the United
Kingdom ensuring with its partners across Europe that there would never again be
a war like that. And that was the great impetus to join the European Union at
the time. Now, as the years have gone by, that impetus faded and different
arguments took hold about Europe, about bureaucracy and all sorts of things
which are important in themselves, but not as important as peace. The 1980s
became quite an ideological age on both sides of the political fence and that
carried through into the 90s with those who came into parliament and it's
followed on. So even today you have in both the Conservative Party and the
Labour Party an ideological fringe to those two parties that are unduly
significant and that is something that has changed. There has been this fracture
between the European Union and the UK. I mean, you have famously said that
Brexit was a mistake. Lots of people disagree with you, but when you reflect on
it now, is that one of the bigger differences between now and then? Oh, beyond
the shadow of doubt. It's not just that we left Europe. It was the nature of the
referendum, the divisions it created and the manner in which we left Europe and
the way in which the public were fed promises which have proved to be wholly
unfounded. I anxiously await for the benefits of Brexit, as yet, except in small
areas, being unable to find them. The land of milk and honey that was held out
by the Brexiteers has so far proved to be sour vinegar rather than milk and
honey. I find it personally quite astonishing that those people who made so many
promises about Brexit haven't retreated in their corners and kept silent about
it rather than boasting about the fact they got Brexit done. But they will be
shouting at the radio right now. Oh, there he goes again. Yeah, I know. That's
their line. They're slamming Brexit. Give it time. Things will get better. How
long? Which life? This life, the next life, my grandson's life? Who knows? They
cannot answer. You've got a Brexiter, though, at the head of the Conservative
Party now leading your party into the election. I mean, he obviously decided
that Brexit did work. You didn't. Well, he did. And we take a different view on
that. But I think in other things, he's done a great deal to restore respect for
our country. And I think he is a serious politician. He seriously considers
policy. Policy is more important to him than publicity. And that is a very
welcome change. I think he's honest and reliable, as indeed I think the lead
with the opposition is. And I think that is a very helpful development for
Britain to recover. Can I ask you a question about trust in politics? The word
sleaze first came to prominence, didn't it, in the 90s during your time in
government. You established the Committee on Standards and Public Life in 1994.
Following questions about the conduct of some individual politicians, cash for
questions comes to mind. 30 years on, though, public trust in government,
parliament and the political parties is worryingly low. Why do you think that
is? Do you still think that there is a problem with integrity in politics?
That's an ongoing problem with integrity in politics. The public have always,
and I think this is rather healthy, had a scepticism of politicians and of
authority generally, but not as serious as we see it now. There undoubtedly is a
real problem. And I think it comes from two or three different things. Firstly,
for 15 years, people are disillusioned because since the 2007 financial crash,
the vast majority of people have seen no increase in their net disposable income
at all. And that is unprecedented. At the same time, other people have made a
great deal of money. And that must really hurt to those who are now in work, but
having to go to food banks, which is intolerable in a nation like ours. And then
there's the question you touched on of trust and integrity. I think that has
been damaged by actions over the past two or three years. I don't think I need
enumerate them. I think all your listeners will know exactly what I'm talking
about. But it is damaging. If trust is not exercised where people are elected to
look after the interests of others, then it will have a very bad effect on the
perception of parliament. And there's one point you mentioned the word sleaze.
There's a distinction between sleaze in terms of things like the government's
behaviour on patronage or on party political donations and sleaze if it is the
individual misdemeanor of individual members of parliament. And I think that was
the predominant problem we had in the 1990s. And of course, then there is one
great gap in politics, which I'm astonished nobody has pointed out. Many of the
people on one wing of the Conservative Party argue very strongly for a low tax
Singapore on Thames type economy. And yet the Conservative Party are also
fighting to keep hold of the Redwall seats. The Redwall seats want a vast amount
of more public expenditure, because that is the only thing that is going to cure
grievances that are built up under governments of different parties and all
parties over the last 40 or 50 years. They don't want high tax though, do they?
Nobody wants high tax. But we have to make a choice. It is appalling that some
of the deprived areas of the United Kingdom, the fifth or sixth richest nation
in the world, that some people are living in worse conditions than you can find
almost anywhere in Europe. That is not a success for governments, not just this
government. That is not a success for governments over the last 50 years. And it
is incumbent upon government to take levelling up seriously. I think I would put
it this way. Dealing with the people left behind, dealing with that particular
problem by levelling up is as big an issue as setting up the National Health
Service. It will take more than a decade, more than two decades. The party that
really puts its shoulder to that wheel will earn a great deal of credit for
itself, for politics generally, for the country and also for what is right.
Well, there we are. That was Sir John Major. I mean, we know where he's coming
from on Brexit and he's not going to change his mind on that. But Robert, what
did you make about those points at the end about levelling up? He talked about
levelling up as the key challenge on a par with the creation of the NHS and
something that will take decades. Do you think your government is anywhere near
gripping it? I'm really encouraged by what this government has started. I think
the manifesto commitments were very important. It was a bit of a sea change, a
different approach from a Conservative government that perhaps in the past had
been seen to be more or less a fair. It was a direct response to the cri de cœur
from left behind communities, particularly in the north and other parts of
Britain, way beyond the southeast. We weren't just talking about infrastructure
projects, important though they are, but the lives of the people in those
communities, often blighted by law and order issues, often blighted by extreme
poverty, just being left behind. And Sir John is right to talk about the long-
term ambition and aim of this. It's going to take a generation to sort out. But
having read Michael Gove's Leving Up White Paper Lastly, I can tell you in that
document are some very crunchy tests, metrics, the sort of things that we need
in order, not just to talk the talk, but to measure success. But so far, the
approach seems to rely on areas, on towns competing for relatively limited pots
of money. I mean, your own West Midland mayor, Andy Street, has criticised what
he called the begging bowl culture. The region's having to beg Westminster for a
bit of money. It's not working in his view. And I had wins for my town, Swindon.
I also had not succeeded in other bids, but we have overall in my town, which in
the south of England has a lot of demographic challenges, actually benefited
hugely from levelling up funding. But here's the thing, the bigger problem is
the short-term nature of funding, too many different pots not being brought
together. Why can't somebody get a grip of it then? Well, when you look at the
White Paper, when you look at the plan and the policy of the government, you can
see a very clear approach, a mission-led approach that I think if we can follow
through and hopefully, you know, whatever party's in power will follow it
through, will achieve what Sir John set out. Let Isabelle have a look. And I
think there has been a shift in the thinking at the top from Michael Gove and
from the Chancellor Jeremy Hunt, who are concerned about that begging bowl
attitude and who do want to devolve some of the decisions further down to say
elected mayors. Although I think that would drive the Greater Manchester Tories
to absolute distraction because, I mean, the name Andy Burnham triggers them
like indicative votes triggers the studio. But I think there is a shift in
thinking. Just to go back to that NHS analogy, one of the reasons the NHS has
endured was that there was cross-party consensus that there should be a national
health service after the war. There was a big fight over what kind of national
health service, but we have the same with levelling up, actually, that Labour is
committed to a not dissimilar model. I mean, a lot of Lisa Nandy's complaints
are that this government's not doing it quickly enough and it's not doing it
well, which I think suggests that there will be a continuation to some degree. I
think the difference, though, is that we object to that sort of Hunger Games
style bidding against each other approach. And we feel that that is just another
example of what Kierkegaard's sticking past to politics. We think there needs to
be investment across nations and regions, sharing wealth with nations and
regions, but also to put the decision-making power closer to the people who have
actual skin in the game. And that means not just giving them the blame when
things go wrong, but giving local councils, local metromares and so on the tools
and the resources to actually do what they know best. But would you like to be
spelling out much more clearly what Labour intends to say and do in the run up
to the election? Because we had Labour's five missions last week. They were very
broad brush, though, weren't they? Not much by way of precise metrics or a
timetable for success. And you're going to get the detail on the first one of
those, the economic mission announced. Securing the whole of the sustained
growth in the G7. Yeah. And we're going to get that tomorrow. We are getting
that tomorrow, I understand. And I believe we are now past the embargo time.
About a day to very good news, Pabra. I think it's a good day to be promoting
good news about what the future holds for this country. I think it's great that
Kierkegaard's got ambition, but I think after 13 years of stagnant growth, high
taxes and low productivity, it's about time we had a government that actually
really believed in the people across the nations and regions and didn't just
chuck them a bit of something every now and then to keep them sweet. That's not
a way to grow a country, to grow an economy. And if we had levels of growth over
the last 13 years, if we'd had even average levels of growth under the Tories
compared to the ones we had under Labour, households would be better off by
thousands. The public finances would be better off by thousands. And it's time
we started taking a new approach. And so we had the five point mission from Keir
Starmer. We've had the five point plan from Rishi Sunak. Do you think the public
are well served by all these five point plans? Do they really address the big
issues confronting politicians and their constituents today? I think, to be
fair, yes, they do touch on the big issues, but I think the frustration from the
public and just listening to Sir John earlier, lack of faith in politics isn't
simply down to our perceptions of what politicians are up to. It is down to a
perception that politicians are failing to deliver. That creed occur that Robert
talked about in 2016 was brought about by the fact that some people in the
country thought this just doesn't work for me. And I think, effectively, since
that referendum of 2016, we haven't seen much in the way of effective governing
because there have been other things, whether it's the Brexit wars or Covid
distracting politicians. And I think what I would really like to see from
whatever party is in power is some sustained attention to the naughty policy
problems that can be addressed by a government but haven't been addressed for
many years. And that takes taking policy seriously and it also means doing
things in the long term. So I think both parties and under these leaders, both
parties seem to be interested in policy. What we need is a long term commitment
because as Sir John said, dealing with big structural problems isn't the job of
one government. It's the job of three, four or even five. And that's Keir's
ambition is that we have a long term mission. He talks about a decade of renewal
and I think it will take longer than that. But long term is exactly what we
need. We can't just have these short term powers. But I'm old enough to remember
Boris Johnson talking about ten years. But the levelling up white paper has
clear targets. The 2030 is a big year for levelling up. We have defined targets
not just on investment but on health and wellbeing and other big issues that are
all part of the levelling up agenda. And I think it's really unfair to ignore
the level of detail within which the government has developed its policy. It's
real. It's happening. And I think it needs to be carried through. Isabelle, just
quickly, there is obviously you know, we're talking about the cost of living
crisis and that's I mean, it's not long term. It's right up against people.
We've got now the energy markets regulator announcing changes to the tariff cap
on energy costs. Just tell us briefly in a sentence what that's going to mean
and how the government will respond. Yeah. So this is off Jim's latest
announcement which is coming tomorrow. And it's for what looks like a 20% rise
in energy costs in April. It's the details of the new cap and it's on the front
page of the mirror. There's been a lot of pressure on Jeremy Hunt to step up the
support. But actually, as Chancellor he has largely been stepping down that
support for households and businesses. Now look, we're coming to the end of the
programme and I have to say since 2007, it has been a privilege to bring the
human side of Westminster politics to you. The beauty of this programme, of
course, is that it allows us to talk as we have delved to inform, hopefully
entertained through the simplest of formats, which is civilised conversation. My
guests may have come from all sides of the political tribes. Their differences
may have been deep. But on a late night programme like this, it really is a joy
sometimes to just shoot the breeze with them, get under the skin of what's
really happening. And for you listening at home, I am happy that you seem to
have mostly enjoyed what we've offered. Give or take the odd moment. I am off
for now as you know, but I can't go without thanking all my colleagues here
behind the scenes. Thanks too to Mohit, Bekaya and the Radio 14 for your endless
support and best of all my editor and my friend Libby Dukes, the brains behind
this programme whose dedication warmth and intellect make it really the
wonderful product that it is. We would be nothing without her and very lucky for
you she is staying on and the Westminster Hour will continue to thrive with
great guests like those around the table with me now and thank them. I think I
was the first person to interview you, wasn't I, when you stood as a candidate
in Bristol. Robert Markwall, who's a local BBC reporter, will be shouting, no, I
was. You were the first national journalist. Sorry, Robert. It was a big deal
for me, both of you, but it was a really big deal for me because also I'd heard
you so much and my mum was beside herself and has continued to listen in to
Westminster Hour. She'll be listening somewhere from wherever she is at the
moment to us right now. I think there's also been some real moments like there
was something with a football match when you were watching the television above
me. I didn't actually know what was going on. I was interested in your
questions. Yeah, it was quite interesting. And there was some strange lockdown
evenings. I seem to remember wearing my pyjamas once a week. I probably
shouldn't have mentioned that. I think we've had plenty of those. And Robert, I
have had endless hours of following you in and out of government. I mean, you
know, you've just been up and down. I know, I mean, you know, it's up and down.
I'm not going to make any inappropriate analogies of the way we're on, the
watershed. But my memory of you, Caledon, is really you're scuttling around
central lobby during the Brexit time. You trying to find out what on earth was
going on. Me also trying to find out what was happening to you in order to have
a meaningful conversation and to inform listeners. And also Tory leadership
contests passed. I mean, there's so many that I remember anxious conversations
about what might happen in some of those contests too. And also some fun along
the way. And Isabel has joined us scuttling around central lobby as well,
haven't you? Well, I mean, I had the pleasure, like so many people, of listening
to you when I was growing up. And then the first time I met you was on my first
day in the Commons Press Gallery, which is a terrifying and litigious place. You
were the only person who spoke to me, didn't scowl at me and who very kindly
told me I was sitting in the wrong seat and where I was safe to sit. So many of
my my good messaging me today saying, please just reflect what a pleasure it has
been working with you. Well, thank you very much. And so supportive to all of us
as women in the lobby as well. We're hugely grateful for that. Absolutely. And
the number of female political editors has risen in no switch. And we have
picked your brains over many a Brexit conundrum. So thank you for that. We
really do appreciate it. And having said all that, we've only got about 10, 20
seconds to look at the front pages. But I think we know what's on the list.
They're plastered with the Northern Ireland Protocol with threats of a Tory
revolt, a very interesting top page piece on the Times from Jonathan Hall Casey,
who's the Review of Terrorism legislation, who's basically arguing that Shamima
Bigum is a British problem. Thank you very much. Well, that is all we've got
time for tonight. Thanks to all my guests, Isabelle Hardman, Sir Robert
Buckland, Thangam Debeneer and Professor Anand Menom. And thank you for
listening tonight and for all these years. I'll be joining you as a listener
next week when the programme returns at its usual time. Bye for now. Come back
and see us soon. The editor of the Westminster Hour is Libby Dukes. The producer
was Hubbein de Minhayas and the studio manager Chris Murphy. Tara Fitzgerald
will be one of Clive Anderson's guests in Loose Ends after the news, but first,
something for Kate Bush fans everywhere. Six music. The year is 1978. Kate Bush
releases her seminal debut album. The Kick Inside. And on the record's 45th
anniversary, we're celebrating the icon that is Kate Bush. Six music deep dive
into the Kick Inside. You can find archive interviews and exclusive performances
as well as playlists and programmes featuring artists she's inspired. She was in
her own world that she had created herself. Way, way ahead of their time. For
all this and more, open BBC Sounds, click the Music tab and scroll to find Kate
Bush's Artist Icons collection.