TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-05-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Handle With Care by The Travelling Wilburys. Thanks very much to Paddy, Paddy
O'Connell. Well, the comedian and writer Robert Webb has no doubt been taking
care over his musical choices and he'll be sharing them with us on this
morning's Desert Island Discs at 11.15 and looking a little further ahead to
half past 12 we'll be going, well, to another island, Cyprus, in today's food
programme to explore the significance of one of the country's most famous
exports, halloumi cheese. That's all ahead but next this morning it's the
Archers and friends and family are preparing to pay tribute to Jennifer just
after this. On BBC iPlayer... Step right in. Perfect timing. The East End is
ever-changing. What is this? Scooter, the order has entered the 1960s, barely
eight years late. But the midwives of Nonata's house are forever constant.
You've a home here now and purpose and people who love you. Call the midwife. We
will be with you every step of the way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. Now on Radio 4
it's the Archers. What do you think? Uh, it's a bit close to the one at the
Arboretum. How about here? Oh, that's better. What's going on? Oh, hey,
Nonatando. It's for our volunteer recruitment day. Your what? I did tell you
about it. Did you? Yeah, last week. Not everyone's as obsessed with this as you
are, Freddie. Haven't you come to give us some moral support? I was just hoping
we could hang out. Is it all getting a bit much in Ambridge? No, Lily, I
wouldn't say that, but I was ready for a change of scene. Perhaps we could do
that some other day. How long are you staying? I go back on the 10th. When's
that? Week Friday. That's as much compassionate leave as I could get. Then the
house hunt starts. Well, flat hunt, probably. Not planning to stay on with your
dad and Sipo? No way. I mean, when you've been used to having your own place. So
you'll have some time after the funeral? It might be a bit less stressed then.
Maybe. Have you seen much of your grandad? Not a lot. Everyone's pretty worried
about him. Alice is going to take special care of him on the day. Oh, good idea.
Oh dear, poor Brian. Um, so how's this recruitment thing going to work? Ah,
well, it's a drop-in day. Anyone who's interested can find out what volunteering
at Lower Loxley entails. From you guys? And Cliff and Diane. Yeah, two of our
longest serving volunteers. They'll be here any minute. They can explain what
it's like being part of the team. Sounds good. Ah, but I have a cunning plan.
The people coming might not realise, but will also be looking at them to assess
how suitable they are. Hmm, I guess you can't just have anybody representing the
place. Well, not everyone's in the front line. There are different sorts of
roles. Yeah, so if someone seems promising but shy, we can find them something
behind the scenes. Or if they're confident and have good people skills... Then
they can fill a public-facing role, like tour guide. Oh, is this your first
customer? No. Hello, Cliff. Thank you for coming. Oh, my pleasure, dear one. Oh,
you can hang your things up on the coat rail. So what does he do? Self-appointed
chief tour guide. We're especially on the lookout for more guides. Like Cliff?
No, no, no, no, not like Cliff. He's only doing this because I can't get rid of
him. He knows his Lower Loxley history, though. Yeah, because he's seen most of
it first-hand. That's a bit unfair. The trouble is, he's been here so long, he
thinks there's only one way of doing things. That's why I'm looking for younger
volunteers. Freddy had a rather challenging encounter with him the other week.
Most of our guides are pretty ancient. I wouldn't say ancient. No wonder young
people stare away from the house in droves. I thought you got plenty of families
visiting. Yeah, for the rare breeds of the treetop walk. But the house is the
core of what Lower Loxley has to offer. I want it to be for everyone. We have
plenty of school parties coming round. Yeah, and who are they faced with? One
foot in the grave over there. You think they might relate better to someone
younger? They're bound to, aren't they? What's he doing now? What does it look
like? Don't you provide your guides with hot drinks? Of course. Cliff always
likes to bring his own flask. Probably got his medication in it. What I've been
trying to explain to Freddy is that older people are more likely to be
available. If they're retired, you mean. And the guides have to have a genuine
interest in history. Actually, uh, Nolotando, maybe you could help with that.
Me? Well, you're a history teacher. You could help screen the hopefuls. What,
set an exam? No, no, just have a friendly chat. One historian to another. Would
that be all right? Totally. Mum made me head of volunteering. A temporary
volunteer coordinator. Whatever. The point is, I'm in charge. So, yes, it would
be a huge help. Well, to be fair, it doesn't sound like you've got much else on
today. That's true. All right, then. Excellent. Time to find some fresh blood.
What you said in your sermon about giving things up for Len. Yes? Got me
thinking, Alan, in the olden days. Olden days? I mean, before I was baptised.
Oh, right. When I gave things up like, I don't know, chocolates or booze, the
fact that it was Len, it didn't really mean anything. It's just another month,
like dry January. So things are different now? Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's got a lot
more significance. I'm not just doing it for myself. That's great, Harrison. So
what have you given up? Being a slave to work. Interesting. Well, particularly
since I got promoted, it's just taken over more and more of me life. It's just,
it's one of those jobs where there's always something extra you can be doing.
But you do very important work. Oh, but the more I give to the job, the less
I've got for other people. Last few months, all I seem to do is graft, come home
and fall asleep in front of the telly. Oh, you sang in Fallon's Choir at
Christmas, didn't you? Well, by the skin of me teeth, we had to cancel stuff
with my mum and dad so I could, and even then I couldn't get to all the
rehearsals. And you have kindly agreed to rehang the curtain in the Lady Chapel.
Oh, that's a ten minute job. I'll come back later with me tour bus. Thank you.
No, it's, it's more, I've seen how much Fallon gets out of organising these
village events, so I'm going to see if there's something I can get involved in.
Ah, sorry to interrupt. Oh, it's all right, Neil. Er, just wanted to check,
Harrison, if you might be available for ringing on Friday. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah,
I'm going to the funeral anyway. Oh, thought you might. I'd like to do Grand
Sire triples to mark Jennifer's passing, so it'd be good to have a full tower. I
know I haven't been a very loyal ringer lately. Oh, that's all right. I was just
saying I'm trying to rebalance my life. I'd like to do a bit more for the
community. Ah, well, have you considered volunteering at Lower Loxley? Oh.
They've got a recruitment day on today. Well, er... Thought I might go along,
see what's what. Right. Details are on their website if you fancy it. OK. So,
anyway, I'll see you Friday, if not before. Definitely, thanks, Neil. Bye then.
Bye-bye, Neil. Bye. So, are you going to follow in Neil's footsteps? Well, it's
not really the sort of thing I had in mind. No. But with Easter coming up and
the coronation, there must be something I can get involved in, or even take
charge of. I'm sure there will be, Harrison. Yeah. Now then, if you're not
rushing off to Lower Loxley, as you know, we've stopped putting out biscuits
because of Lent, but we can still offer coffee and conversation, yeah? Well,
ever since I stopped being chair of the parish council, I suppose, I've been
looking for another way I could give something back. Hmm, that's really
interesting, Neil. So, you feel that being a volunteer here would be giving
back? Well, it's part of our heritage, isn't it? Can't be easy keeping a place
like this going. Believe me, it isn't. Is it, Freddie? I mean, we manage. So, if
I can help in some small way? Oh, very good. Um, Noletander? Oh, I don't think
we need to bother Nolet... Yes, Neil. When you say heritage, is that something
you're interested in? Well, yeah, I'd say so, yeah. And how do you pursue this
interest? Well, I've lost count of the times I must have visited this place, and
I like to read about local history. Excellent. Like, you know that book your
grandma wrote with John Tregor, An Ambridge and English Village Through the
Ages? Do you know it? Of course. It's very good. In part. I will challenge some
of the assumptions, though. Really? In what way? The chapter on the Civil War...
We don't really want to take up any more of Neil's time, though, do we? So,
thank you. And what other experience could you bring to the role? Well, plenty.
26 years on the parish council. I'm a church warden and tower captain, of
course. Sorry? Bell ringing. Oh. And I'm in a management position at Barrow
Farm. But you've no direct experience of, say, talking to school parties,
though, do you? Oh, no, not at all. Oh, no, not such. But I've had kids of my
own and I've got grandkids. It wouldn't frighten me. Of course it wouldn't. Did
you have any more questions, Neil? No, no, no. You've given me quite a grilling,
I must say. In that case, I'm sure we'll be in touch about the next stage. Oh,
OK. Well, that'd be great. Thanks all. No, thank you. Bye, Neil. Yeah, bye. See
you. Who says we're going to be in touch? You'd be mad not to. Neil's a lovely
man, good with people, and he'd obviously take the job very seriously. Yeah, but
he'd be just the same as all our other volunteers. If we want to attract a wider
range of visitors, we really need to find a few guides below bus pass age. But
as Lily said, availability is an issue. Ah, maybe. But we're not going to
revitalise Lower Loxley if we just not find a few guides. We're not going to
revitalise Lower Loxley if we just recruit more clones of Diane and Cliff.
Beggars can't be choosers, Freddie. Can I remind you we've been here for two
hours, and we've had interest from precisely one person. Everyone seems to be
planning to come on Friday. Yes. Well, that's a good thing, isn't it? Oh, no,
absolutely. It's really rather silly, but... What? I can't help feeling a little
nervous about it. You? You must have done hundreds of funerals. Oh, I have. I
mean, this one does feel a bit different, though. How so? Well, there's always
an extra dimension when it's someone who's been a friend. Oh, I can see that.
You know, there are times where I just like to be in the congregation, paying my
respects. Sure. Especially since I lost my first wife. I do feel for Brian.
That's only natural. Of course, there's also been tension between me and the
Aldridges over this proposed window. I had heard something. And not that long
ago, Kate was threatening to report me to the bishop when I lost my rag about
Chris and Amy. I remember that. Yeah. I'd hate to imagine her reaction if I
messed something up. You won't, though, surely? Oh, has been known, Harrison. I
once got the name of the deceased wrong. No. Yeah. Her name was Annabelle, and I
called her Jezebel. Oh, Alan, how did that happen? No idea. It just slipped out.
I mean, Jezebel, of all names. Oh, no. Oh. Funerals are a day that families
never forget. I really have to get this one right. Cheer up, Freddie. It was
worth a try. It didn't really go as I'd hoped. You had a few people through. A
handful, Nolotando. I thought I'd be, you know, picking the cream of the crop.
Yes. Slow Button seemed quite keen on helping in the office. And you've got two
good contenders for public roles. Oh, you can't be serious. Oliver's even older
than Cliff. Where's my fresh blonde? If you're that bothered, you could try a
different approach. Like what? I don't know. A social media campaign?