TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on and shared this week in Pick of the World. This is the BBC World Service,
the world's radio station. You're listening to TechTent on the BBC World Service
with me, Zoe Kleinman. This week, the US Supreme Court hears arguments that big
tech should be considered publishers of the harmful content others upload onto
their platforms. It would mean that these major companies that have influence in
every corner of the world, they would basically be putting the brakes on them to
say, you need to be a bit more careful about how your products and services
affect people's lives. Ukraine has thousands of tech workers. We hear how one of
them has coped with a year of war. Sometimes I sort of feel a sudden anger. I
sort of have a little breakdown and I start screaming for 30 seconds and then I
just go back to being calm and sane. And so I'm going to try and drive a jet ski
without using my hands. A company that's had a brainwave about brainwaves.
That's all to come after the latest world news. Hello, I'm Neil Nunes with the
BBC News. Israeli settlers in the occupied West Bank have set fire to
Palestinian houses, shops and vehicles, killing one Palestinian man. It comes
after two Israelis were earlier shot dead in the same place. Your land now has
more details. In the course of the day, there was this attack in Hawara, close
to Nablus, where two Israeli brothers from a nearby settlement were shot at
close range. The Israeli military says it's hunting for a Palestinian gunman.
But there has also been continuing violence there over the past few hours as
Jewish settlers set fire to Palestinian properties, some with families inside
who had to be evacuated. There was one Palestinian man who was killed after he
was shot. Palestinian health officials say that was after settlers and soldiers
entered into his village. And that is really keeping tensions very high. Tens of
thousands of people have taken part in protests across Mexico against government
plans to slash funding for the National Electoral Institute. The largest
demonstration was in Mexico City. Organisers said that half a million people had
taken to the streets nationwide. Will Grant has more now in this report. Critics
of the reform are worried that the bill, approved by the Senate last week, would
undermine one of the few trusted public institutions in the country and place it
under presidential influence. Mr López Obrador has dismissed such claims and
said that the electoral body, called the INE, is in need of complete reform and
should have its budget cut and its powers curtailed. In a sense, the argument
over the fate of the INE gets to the heart of the debate over Mr López Obrador's
presidency. His supporters say he's acting in the interests of the Mexican
electorate, while his critics see a worrying trend of authoritarianism in the
key parts of his political agenda. The President of the European Commission,
Ursula von der Leyen, is to meet the UK Prime Minister Rishi Sunak in Britain on
Monday. A joint statement said they would work towards finding a solution to the
dispute on post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. Kezia Adlir
sent this report from Brussels. For Rishi Sunak, a deal avoids a looming trade
war with Brussels, the UK's biggest trade partner after the government
previously threatened to unilaterally override the original Northern Ireland
agreement. Better relations also open up new possibilities, like UK access to
the EU's respected Horizon research programme, a financial services agreement
and improved arrangements with France to stop people smugglers. Brussels,
meanwhile, yearns for a friendlier post-Brexit era with the UK. Russia's
invasion of Ukraine has served as a reminder of shared values and priorities.
World News from the BBC. Exiled Belarusian opposition figures say a Russian
military plane has been damaged in a sabotage attack inside the country. They
have attributed the attack to what they call anti-government partisans. BIPOL, a
grouping of former law enforcers now opposed to the autocratic government of
Alexander Lukashenko, says it was responsible. The investment bank founded by a
Chinese billionaire who was reported missing 10 days ago says it is now aware
that Bao Fan is cooperating in an investigation being carried out by the
authorities. Shares in the bank China Renaissance plummeted to a record low
after it said it had been unable to contact Mr Bao. From Monday, the law in
England and Wales will raise the age at which a person can get married from 16
to 18. The change is intended to protect vulnerable children from being forced
to marry. The new rules will make it a crime punishable by up to seven years in
jail for an adult to facilitate the marriage of anyone under age 18. The change
will bring England and Wales in line with many other countries. Peisy Mahmood,
who was married at 16, welcomed the change. I know what it feels like to have
gone through child marriage and it's not something that I want anyone to go
through. And the great thing is the day is here now and it means that here in
England and Wales we have put something in place that protects children from
going through the same harms that me and my sister went through. Chile will
deploy troops on Monday to patrol its borders with Peru and Bolivia in an
attempt to control the entry of undocumented migrants. Military units will be
posted to the northern regions of Tarapaca, Antofagasta and Arica with powers to
detain anyone passing through unauthorised border crossings and hand them over
to local police. The deployment will initially be for 90 days. BBC World News.
Big drama on this week's TechTent with me Zoe Kleinman. Is the internet as we
know it about to be reshaped? A lot is riding on the outcome of two Supreme
Court cases in the US. We'll find out more about them and why this could be a
big fork in the digital road. We'll also speak to the Ukrainian government about
how its huge tech sector has coped with and adapted to a year of war. And I have
a go at controlling virtual reality using only my mind and hear how
neurotechnology aims to change our lives in the future. At Cogitat we are
essentially trying to allow people to connect their minds to computers and we
really want to take the next step in this technology and bring it to the public
in a way that people haven't seen before. We all know that some of the most
harmful and hateful content imaginable circulates on big tech social media
platforms. And though the firms come under pressure to take it down, they're
generally not legally considered the publishers of that material, which, if it
appeared on TV or in a newspaper, they might be prosecuted for. In the US that's
because of a federal law called Section 230, which this week is being challenged
at the US Supreme Court in two separate but related cases, the first involving
Google, the second involving Twitter. So how would it reshape the internet
around the world if the legal protection those firms currently get is
challenged? I spoke to Dr Mary-Anne Franks, a professor of law and president of
the Cyber Civil Rights Initiative. A lot of these kinds of cases have come up
before in other courts and most of those cases have not gotten very far. And
this is really the first time a case like this that directly asks the question
of how much immunity these companies should get under federal law. This is the
first time the Supreme Court said this is a case we want to try to decide. Why
have the others failed? The others have failed primarily because the lower
courts, so not the Supreme Court, but the lower courts and multiple
jurisdictions in the United States have tended to come out the same way on these
cases by saying these cases are effectively barred by this federal law called
Section 230, which in essence says you can't hold these intermediaries
responsible for the speech of other people that might have been posting on the
platform or communicating on the platform. I've been talking about this for
years and I have struggled with it for years, that sense that a platform like
Facebook or Twitter or, you know, any of these networks are not publishers in
the same way as a traditional publisher is. Because they are publishers, aren't
they? In all but name, they are publishing content. Well, here's where the,
well, a lot of the controversies does circulate around what are the right
analogs to what a social media platform is. Is a social media platform like a
newspaper? Are they like a bookstore? Are they like a library? And the courts
have really not wanted to talk too much about what the right analogy is. They've
instead interpreted this specific law to say, well, whatever they are, we can't
treat them as if they were publishers. And that's a very awkward way of trying
to say we can't hold them accountable simply for making accessible to other
people what someone else said. So if I take someone's speech and I repeat it,
and that speech is defamatory, if I were just a regular individual in the United
States, I could be held liable for that. If I'm a newspaper publisher or a book
publisher and I do the same thing, I can be held liable for that. What section
230 says is that, but if you're an online or what they call an interactive
computer service provider, you cannot be held liable because of that. So one
could say, look, the law does say that there are some protections online that
you don't get offline and that that's very reasonable. In other words, that very
punitive rule that says everyone who repeats a libelous statement is going to be
responsible for that statement as if they were the speaker. Many people,
including myself would say, you don't want that rule for the internet because
that would mean every time you tweeted someone else's tweet or you link to
somebody else's post, if there was something wrong with that post, you would be
as responsible as the person who originally wrote it. That being said, what the
courts have done in their very expansive interpretation of this law has been to
say, not just that is different, but basically anything the social media
platform does, including knowing exactly what is harmful about the content. And
instead of taking it down, boosting it, amplifying it, recommending it, giving
it more chances to make money. And then even when harm does happen, saying it's
not our responsibility because it's not something that we created. And I think
there are really strong grounds for saying that that interpretation of you can
do whatever you want, even if you know that the content is harmful and illegal
and you never have to face consequences for it. I don't think that's actually
what the statute says. And in addition to that, we know what the consequences of
that policy reading would be, which is you're telling big corporations and other
companies too, but also the big corporations that they can be as reckless as
they want about the way they design their platforms or services and what they
allow on their platforms, let them make all the money they want, knowing that
they'll never be, they'll never be subject to a lawsuit. And that's a really bad
incentive for those companies. So what happens then if, if the, if Gonzales, the
Gonzales family does win? What the court could do at this point with Gonzales is
they could dismiss it as improvidently granted. They could affirm the lower
court ruling, which would basically just put us back in the status quo. So it's
back to what Google was already doing. But if you do get a ruling that says,
well, Google wasn't protected in however narrowly the court wants to define it
to say section two 30 doesn't actually protect you, you would see some real
changes. I think on the part of Google. Like what? I mean, how, how would I
notice Google's nervousness? Well, here's what one might hope at least. And this
isn't necessarily what would happen because those on Google's side would say
that if the ruling comes out against Google, terrible things will happen. The
internet will be censored. Everything will break and no one will ever be able to
use the internet again. That is one version of what could happen. And I think
it's highly unlikely, or you could actually have Google get worried. We might be
found accountable in some cases. And so we are going to be more careful. We
might have more stringent terms and policies around things like terrorist
content, or we might decide that we're not going to let people just upload
videos without any kind of verifications about what the video contains or who's
actually uploading it. They might want to change some, uh, some aspects of how
their algorithms do sorting or what they recommend. I think there's many people
who would say it would be wonderful if these companies would actually take a
little bit more care about the way they design their platforms and about how
they respond to abuse and harassment and terrorism and any number of things. So
one, I think the salutary effect of a ruling that says section two 30 isn't as
big as you think it is, is that there would be more alignment between the way
that other countries may think about competing values and the way that us-based
companies have done. So it would actually seem that lowering that threshold,
restricting that scope of immunity somewhat would be really good for the rest of
the world too, because it would mean that these major companies that have
influence in every corner of the world, that they would basically be putting the
brakes on them to say, you need to be a bit more careful about how your products
and services affect people's lives. It's now been one year since Russia invaded
Ukraine. Thousands of Ukrainian soldiers and civilians have been killed and many
more people have been displaced. Russian bombs and missiles have wrought havoc
targeting key parts of the country's infrastructure as well as homes and
offices. The country has a large tech sector with an estimated 160,000 IT
professionals and 4,000 companies and links to some of the biggest tech firms in
the world. How have they all coped with and adapted to 12 months of war? A year
ago, shortly after the invasion began, we heard from one of those tech workers,
Olesiv Ripa, who works for the Ukrainian software development company Intelyas.
This is what she told us then. It was the morning of 21st of February and I woke
up from my husband hugging me and saying like, please, please wake up. It all
started right now after like two weeks of war. I spent most of my time at the
computer because, well, I cannot sleep anyway. And when the sirens go off, I
just take my phone with me to the bomb shelter and I continue the phone calls,
the chats with my colleagues from there. The thing that I keep myself busy is
really helping to withstand all the mayhem. I cannot explain how it works. I
cannot tell you how does the mind cope with all this pressure. I know that it
does turn off the constant flood of thoughts and anxiety and worries about my
friends who stayed in Kiev and Kharkiv. The work just shuts it down and it sort
of reminds me about the time before war. Ola, that was 12 months ago when we
last spoke to you. How do you feel listening to that now? Well, I do sound
terrified at that time. So I didn't think I was that scared because at that time
I was like, you know, pretty occupied with tons of thoughts of how it would be,
how would my friends be, how would everything be. And now after 12 months of
war, I feel like, you know, more accustomed to the situation. So I kind of know
how it goes. I know where all of my friends are. I know where is my family and
we all know what to do to keep ourselves safe. And I don't think we are that
scared anymore. So yeah, it has changed a lot. And how are you working
practically? How are you doing it? Well, I have my laptop. I work remotely.
Well, I don't know. I just open my laptop and I work. How do you have the
internet? Are you using Starlink? No, actually, we have a better connection
right now. So the power outages are not that often right now. So when we have
the electricity at home, we have the internet. So it's fine so far. But yeah, I
have a backup plan just in case. What's your backup plan? We have co-workings
here that are pretty close to the bomb shelters. There are the power stations
and the Starlinks and a safe place to go just in case. And do you see any signs
of things improving? About war, you mean? Yes, I suppose I do mean about the war
or just about day to day life. I can't say that the life is improving because,
you know, we can't make actual plans or, I don't know, travel or, I don't know,
feel safe all the time. So I cannot say that the things are improving, but they
are less scary than it was like 12 months ago. So I think it's a kind of
improvement. Yeah, but like we live day to day. This is not life. This is sort
of existing mostly. Are you all right mentally? Are you all right? Do you feel
emotionally strong? I feel calm most of the time, but sometimes I sort of feel
sudden anger about such small things that I couldn't even expect. So I sort of
have a little breakdown and I start screaming for 30 seconds and then I just go
back to being calm and sane. So it sort of changed, but I don't know whether
it's OK or not, but this is how it is right now. Joining me now is Alex
Bornyakov, Ukraine's Deputy Minister for Digital Transformation. Alex, we heard
there one tech worker's experience of coping with a year of war. How would you
say the tech sector as a whole has adapted? Well, sometimes I even can't find
the right words, but I think it's fantastic. You know, when this all started to
happen, I was really upset because actually Ukrainian tech sector was caught on
the top of its, I don't know, rising all the time in the history of independent
Ukraine. Their gross digits year over year were like 35-45%. And when the war
unleashed, I immediately realized that it's not going to be good and it's not
going to end well for IT industry with so many risks and so many bad outcomes.
But eventually, they even managed to grow 6% year over year. And this is
absolutely fantastic. That is something to be very proud of. I'm surprised to
hear you say that, to be honest. I wasn't expecting that. You know what, I was
also not expecting, as I mentioned before, I thought that the whole industry as
a whole is going to fall and we'll be in a recession. But it didn't happen. Do
you think that the tech sector particularly lends itself to things like remote
working? You know, people are used to not necessarily being in the office all
the time. And it doesn't seem that work stopped. Yeah, I think that is one of
two factors, two major factors that actually helped it to grow. So, the recent
years with COVID made organizations learn very important lessons that helped
them in times of war. They were just recovering from COVID, getting back to
offices, but they had this experience how to work remotely, how to distribute
people and still remain effective operations. And I mentioned this, one of the
key factors is that the majority of Ukrainian IT has clients outside Ukraine.
So, they were not affected by the war. Do you think that the experience of
living and working during a war is going to influence the Ukraine tech sector in
years to come? Do you think it will have some sort of legacy? Well, totally and
absolutely from an operational standpoint. I don't think they will come back to
big offices and one huge location in the close future. Also, it's already
obvious that a lot of companies from Ukraine migrated to different countries and
they have offices in Europe, in America, in some of the Asia, as well as
Ukraine. So, they will be like more international after the war than before the
war. Finally this week, I've said a few strange things while doing this job.
Thank you for pointing them all out. But few have been weirder than this. So,
I'm going to try and drive a jet ski without using my hands, just by thinking.
Here's me attempting to control a virtual reality jet ski with my mind.
Normally, you'd do it by squeezing paddles with your hands. But what I was doing
there was trying out a prototype headset created by a company called Cogitat
that monitors your brain activity and translates motor signals into actions. In
this case, driving that VR jet ski just by thinking about it. As I found out,
it's a bit tricky. So, what do I do? Just think about… Well, you can try
thinking, imagining the same person… Think about squeezing my hands? Yeah, it's
just the first time you've done it. So, if I now think about closing my hands.
So, this is so strange. I'm trying to think about moving, closing my hands
without actually closing them. And there you go. Cogitat is one of a number of
neurotech companies. You might have heard of one of them called Neuralink set up
by friend of the programme Elon Musk, trying to create a direct interface
between brains and computers. After my mind control jet ski demonstration, I
spoke to the founders of Cogitat, Dimitris Adamos and first of all, Alan Ponaia.
At Cogitat, we are essentially trying to allow people to connect their minds to
computers. And we really want to take the next step in this technology and bring
it to the public in a way that people haven't seen before. I've just had a go at
this and it is quite extraordinary to see your actions happening on screen just
because you're thinking about them and not because you're doing them. But it's
kind of a bit freaky as well, Dimitris. Is it? This specific part of the
technology is in the space of active brain computer interface, which means that
the user has to think of something and that is decoded. Think of a movement and
that being decoded into an action. So if you don't choose to interact with the
system, nothing happens. And everybody's brainwaves are different and they're
also different depending on what else is going on in the day, aren't they? Yes,
that brings the main challenge here. That there are so many underlying processes
and that everyone's brain activity is different during the day, across months.
And of course, it's the anatomical difference of each one's skull that all of
these are sources of variability that we have to face to tackle this problem. I
mean, I just had a go with the game, Alan, but there are some serious
applications for this, aren't there? Yes, we've just got an Innovate UK grant to
explore using this for stroke rehabilitation. And one of the main aspects which
we're quite excited about is that when a person has had a stroke and they can't
move their arm, they're very demotivated to partake in rehabilitation. But our
technology will allow them to imagine moving their hand and seeing a hand move
on the screen, which we believe will motivate them to start their course of
physiotherapy. And we're not necessarily looking at this being far ahead in the
future, are we? So our plan is to have a working prototype within the next six
to 12 months. I think when you think about the brain-computer interfaces, the
company that springs to mind, of course, is Neuralink, not surprisingly, because
it's run by somebody who likes attention, Elon Musk. But what he and that
company are working on is very different to what you're doing. How so, Alan? So
Neuralink are mainly based on an invasive technology which requires an
operation. We're focusing on decoding brainwaves from wearable devices. And the
reason for that is because we believe that it could be more applicable to the
larger market. We believe that we can incorporate it into VR and AR technology
to allow people to control movement within those environments. And also, it
allows us to collect a lot more data without having to operate on multiple
people. So ultimately, your plan is to work with a hardware maker, someone maybe
like Meta or HTC or one of the big brands, to incorporate your tech into what
they're offering. How might that work? So our tech involves a number of EEG
electrodes. We think the minimum amount we require is around six. So six
electrodes around the motor cortex could be added to any hardware device, and
then that could be used to control the device. Somebody would be able to
interact with VR environments just by using their thoughts. Are you excited by
that? I think we've met a lot of patients who've had strokes and their
interaction with these new technologies such as VR, they are really excited
about it. And we have met many people who are very keen to be involved with this
project because they do see a massive potential for it. I've got one more
question before I go. Tell me about how you beat the US Army. So we were
involved in a competition called NeurIPS, which was a competition designed for
machine learning. Essentially, as we have discussed, EEG changes in an
individual at different times of day and from individual to individual. And the
competition was looking really at how a company can find the common patterns
within all of the noise. We went up against over 100 labs around the world. We
came number one. US Army labs were also entered into this competition and they
were placed second. How did that feel? Difficult to find words. As working with
the young talented team that you met, every day is a new day and our journey so
far was fascinating. What I remember is, you know, after the celebration that we
had with the team, I told them that we could have some time off. So the prize
was a holiday. Nobody wanted that. Nobody wanted the time off. We were working
on the next day because we had different goals. I mean, it's really fascinating
for us and everyone is enjoying this journey. Dimitris Adamas and Alan Parnia
are there. Unlike them, we will be taking some time off here at Tech10, but
we'll be back with another edition next week. The BBC News Machine, however,
never sleeps. Follow our latest work on the website at bbc.com slash technology
on Twitter at BBC Tech and me at ZSK. This is the BBC World Service meeting the
Vietnam War veterans who left America and retired to the country they fought in.
Fifty years ago, on the 29th of March, all American forces will be withdrawn
from South Vietnam. Today, a small group of U.S. veterans, now in their 70s,
have returned to live there permanently. I was expecting people to hate me when
I came back. People welcomed me like I had just left the day before. I am Nga
Pham, and I'll be finding out why they choose to retire in Vietnam. You're
ashamed of what you've seen and what you did. I say this is the only thing that
makes sense, me living in Vietnam. I came back to fight the war. I kind of
explain it as when you're a little kid, you've got a monster under the bed. I
had to look under the bed, and the monster wasn't there. No place like NAMM. At
bbcworldservice.com slash documentaries. Next on the BBC World Service, what
happens if Ukraine runs out of ammunition in the war with Russia? A letter of
anger and frustration to Turkey's leaders after the earthquakes there. And the
young African farmers sharing their success stories on social media. I delve
into the stories that got you listening and talking this week. That's with me,
Anna Doble, in Pick of the World, after the news. BBC News with Neil Nunes.
Palestinian homes, businesses and cars have been set ablaze in the occupied West
Bank, and a Palestinian man has been shot dead nearby, as Israeli settlers
rioted. They were reacting to the earlier killing of two Jewish brothers in the
same village. Tens of thousands of protesters have marched on the Presidential
Palace in Mexico in protest at a planned reform of the country's electoral body.
The measure would close the agency's local offices and slash its annual budget.
Exiled Belarusian opposition figures say a Russian military plane has been
damaged in a sabotage attack inside the country. They say anti-government
partisans carried out the attack. The investment bank, founded by a Chinese
billionaire who was reported missing 10 days ago, says it's now aware that Bao
Fan is cooperating in an investigation being carried out by the authorities.
Shares in China Renaissance Bank had plummeted after it was unable to contact
Mr. Bao. The President of the European Commission is to meet the British Prime
Minister near London later today. Ursula von der Leyen and Rishi Sunak said they
would work together to resolve the dispute on post-Brexit trading arrangements
for Northern Ireland. The Brazilian authorities say 64 people are known to have
died in last week's flood and landslides in the state of Sao Paulo, where a
month's worth of rain fell in 24 hours. An Australian firm has bought the
defunct battery-making company Britishvolt, which collapsed last month.
Britishvolt had plans to build a $4.8 billion battery plant in Northern England.
England and Wales have raised the legal age at which a person can get married,
from 16 to 18. The change makes it a criminal offence to facilitate the marriage
of anyone younger than this. The law is intended to protect vulnerable children.
BBC News. That dark night, one year ago, the world was literally at the time
bracing for the fall of Kiev. Seems like a lot longer ago than a year, but think
back to that year. Perhaps even the end of Ukraine. You know, one year later,
Kiev stands. And Ukraine stands. Democracy stands. The Americans stand with you.
And the world stands with you. Hello and welcome to Pick of the World, where I'm
looking at the stories from our BBC World Service programmes and podcasts that
most got your attention online over the last few days. I'm Anna Doble, the
digital editor, and it's your activity that decides what I talk about and who I
talk to. I want to know what makes you stop to listen and then sometimes to also
add your voice. This week, it's growing anger at why the earthquake in Turkey
was quite so destructive. I'll also be hearing from entrepreneurs in South
Africa to find out what it takes to succeed with a farming startup. We go first,
though, to Ukraine, where Russia's invasion is now one year old and there are
growing concerns about ammunition supplies. As you heard there during his visit
to the country this week, America's President Biden said Western support for
Ukraine would not fail. Phillips Payson O'Brien is Professor of Strategic
Studies at the University of St Andrews in the UK, and he's been chatting with
NewsHour's Julian Marshall. We know that they've been using ammunition at a
huge, catastrophic rate. That's what war does. That's also, by the way, for the
Russians. Russian artillery fire is way down from the summer because they've
used up a huge amount of their stocks. So both Russia and Ukraine have basically
been firing massive amounts of artillery for eight, nine months now. The
Russians even longer. The Ukrainians have one problem, that they also have a
range of different systems. So the Ukrainians have to juggle different artillery
and tank ammunition considerations. So they have different artillery stocks for
different equipment. A lot of them will be suffering. It might be actually that
they're running out of the old Russian Soviet ammunition more than anything
else, but they will certainly be under real strain and they need to be careful
because they, one, want to save up some stuff, have enough stocks to go on the
offensive in a few months, but they also don't want the Russians to press ahead
too far now if indeed the Russians are having an offensive. So the Russians have
the ability to manufacture more ammunition, but the Ukrainians don't. Yeah, I
mean, one, Russia has a homegrown ammunition manufacturing capacity. We don't
really know how large it is. We assume that they had such large stocks, that
wouldn't be a major issue. Or a lot of people said earlier in the war that
Russia had many years of ammunition stocks and so that people weren't looking at
production capacity. But right now it's clear Russia didn't have the ammunition
stocks that was assumed that they had. So Russia is now going to have to ramp up
its production and we'll see whether they can do that. I mean, the big change in
artillery fire in the last seven months has not been for Ukraine. It's been the
decline of Russian ammunition fire. They've gone from 60,000 rounds a day, I
think to 20,000 rounds. But can Ukraine manufacture its own ammunition? I think
they're setting up production capacities to manufacture some, but they won't be
able to manufacture anything near like they need. They're going to have to get
that from NATO countries. And this story got your attention online this week
with Russia's President Putin also making a speech, but to say that Ukraine had
started the war. I jumped on a call with James Waterhouse, the BBC's Ukraine
correspondent, who's been covering the war since day one. I started by asking
him what the landmark moment really means to Ukrainians. I think to me, the
anniversary for so many Ukrainians is more of a symbol of survival in the sense
that few predicted Volodymyr Zelensky would still be in power days after Russia
launched its full scale invasion. And where he appeared with Joe Biden this week
along that sort of stretch of cobbled road towards St Michael's Cathedral.
Twelve months ago, it was full of people signing up to be issued with an
automatic rifle who are volunteering to fight. And these people were very
nervous. They were dangerous to be around because they were pointing AK-47s
everywhere. And then there were people frantically skidding around corners just
trying to get out. There was black smoke on the horizon. There was just real,
real panic and visceral trauma. So with all the pomp and ceremony of this week,
it is a marker and it's an important marker to people. But attentions swiftly
turned to, but what next? You know, how are we going to prevail? Because no one
is thinking that Russia is going to disappear any time soon and no one is
writing Russia off, despite the, you know, certainly here in Kiev, despite the
real anger and hatred they feel towards Moscow because of everything they've
gone through. Yeah. These anniversaries do give us an opportunity to take stock
around the world and of course in Ukraine. Is there a feeling of frustration
though that the social media world, the wider world only looks back through the
window when there's a key date on the calendar? Usually I'd agree with you,
Anna, but I think in the case of the war in Ukraine, it is in the country's
interest to keep this conflict in the public eye. You could see President
Zelensky was just beaming ear to ear and, you know, his cabinet, they were made
up that President Biden agreed to this trip and there'd been some planning. It
wasn't confirmed until the Sunday, but for President Biden to be inside the
Mariinsky Palace and to walk the streets of Kiev, it was a huge deal. And when
you speak to people, that's all they kind of care about. It's saying, look, you
know, this is a show of unity, unlike any other, because there's been like a
treadmill of official visitors and they're all welcomed and pledges of support
are announced and everything else. But the leader of the free world is a level
up. Let's talk about social media, because you yourself, since the war began,
you've been really active on Twitter and quite often to correct misinformation,
disinformation. First of all, how have you felt social media for your own
journalism has played a part, but also how are people generally sharing new
information and which of the platforms that really make a difference? You know,
there was a moment in Zaporizhia last September where we were down there doing
some filming and it sits north of quite an active part of the front line on the
Dnipro River. And we just heard, I was sat in there with my cameraman, Matt
Goddard, and we just heard this jet go overhead and we looked at each other. We
were working and then we suddenly went, oh, got a jet, because there's a no fly
zone. So if you're hearing something flying overhead, something's happening. But
almost immediately we looked on Telegram and the Ukrainian defence ministry had
said, don't worry, we're just doing military stuff. Words to that effect. You
know, so the communication is extraordinary where in real time you learn about
what is happening and where, but you do have to take it with a pinch of salt. So
in terms of official channels, social media has been priceless in the sense that
you get all the different military commands chipping in, you get overnight
addresses from President Zelensky and all the different government departments.
So you can kind of collate this, but both sides are trying to mislead each
other. So when you talk about military losses or gains or whatever else, it's
not always going to be the clearest picture, but it has been good in that sense,
both collate, but also be more considered in our storytelling. So when I tweet,
for example, I try and kind of surmise or give it a little bit more of analysis
of the situation. I remember during the heat of the invasion, I was doing almost
like emoji, not in a comedy sense, but sort of emoji updates, just trying to put
flags of the nations involved, everything else just to make it digestible
because the pace of the story was moving at such a fast rate. But now it's, I
think I'm in a much more considered phase because the pace hasn't let up, but
audiences are getting tired. You know, it's hard to keep pace with this story.
So we need to be a bit more kind of targeted in what we say and also explain why
it matters. So the most common question we get on Facebook around anything we
post on Ukraine is when will it end? What's the timescale? Now we're at this
year anniversary. It's the hardest question to answer I know, but what is your
feeling? I think there are three paths that we could well be heading down. And
with the sad caveat that all signs are pointing to a war that could go into the
years. The first path is an outright victory for either side. So either Ukraine
fully repels Russia or Russia takes the whole of the Eastern Donbass region,
consolidates, doubles down, calls for peace and somehow peace is agreed. The
second is some kind of peace deal where in the absence of a clear victory
looking likely for either side, which I think is looking the case at the moment,
the calls for peace will only get louder. You've seen political division in the
US, you've seen claims China is getting involved to call for peace at the
moment. Those calls will only get louder. And then so you get to the issue of
where is the concession? There could be a scenario where Ukraine gives up
Crimea. But what Ukraine keeps saying is that that's a non-starter because if we
give up territory, it both makes us weaker and Russia will just do it again
because we're talking about a nine year war here. And then the third path is
just outright attrition because Russia is no stranger to it. They can just keep
fighting, they can keep disrupting Ukraine. Ukraine will never give up. That is
clear. So you just have this active war zone spanning along a land corridor from
the south to the east of Ukraine for the foreseeable future. So those are the
paths to me at the moment. This is a war which changes month by month. I
remember with the last summer, it felt like Russia was really starting to make
gains again. Then we had the counter offensives in the autumn and we thought,
oh, Ukraine could actually do this. And here we are now with Russia's trying to
seize the initiative in the spring. So it changes. But those to me are the three
paths. If you're living in Turkey, the construction industry is part of your
daily life. Excavators, shovels, dumpers and graders populate our roads every
day. People allocated their savings to property developers after a similarly
deadly quake in 1999 to ensure they lived in safe homes. Over the past
fortnight, we learned they had been fooling us. Our captains of industry who
made their fortunes from the construction craze were nowhere to be seen, for it
seemed there was no profit to be made from rescuing the dead. In the first two
days of the quake, there was a feeling of being forsaken in cities like
Iskanderun, my father's hometown, where just a few rescue teams arrived on
Monday. On the state-controlled media, the earthquake was stripped of its
political and social context on debate programs. It was the same inadequacy,
ineptitude and unpreparedness we saw in the 1999 earthquake recurred in front of
our eyes. There was a feeling of inevitability here. And our leaders talked
about fate's plans. This is the challenge that awaits us now as a nation in the
upcoming days of rebuilding southern Turkey. We'll have to ensure that those who
have profited from our tragedy end up paying the heaviest possible price. And
the politicians who empowered them will no longer be able to do so. That was
Turkish writer and essayist Kaya Genç who recorded this very moving and angry
audio letter for our weekend program. The deadly earthquakes have now claimed an
estimated 50,000 lives in both Turkey and Syria. And the letter was the subject
of our top tweet this week, reaching 300,000 Twitter accounts. Meanwhile this
digital video that I'm watching at the moment is about a Turkish town Erzin that
suffered very little damage. When we shared it on Facebook it was quickly viewed
100,000 times. And lots of you keen to know why the town has been more resilient
than other places. In the video we hear from the local mayor who says careful
builders, many more single story dwellings and strict construction rules could
be the answer to that question. In the comments on this one lots of you are
calling the mayor, Okes Elmasoglu, a hero. Way in the US left us this on the BBC
World Service Facebook page. A difficult challenge for an honest building
official anywhere in the world. And the poor trusting people who occupy these
structures pay the horrible price. So much for industry being self-policing. And
yes, structures can be made safe, but it would mean banning construction in
certain high-risk seismic zones or prohibitively expensive building designs.
Okay this next story got into 100,000 of your Facebook feeds this week and for
very positive reasons. Farming in Africa is getting a makeover as younger
entrepreneurs share their success stories on social media. 28-year-old Maletsiri
Magodi is one of those we hear from. She's chatting to Africa Daily's Alan
Kisuja. My farm is about two hectares and I'm currently planting spinach and
pumpkin. Two hectares of land is about five acres, which is about five football
fields. And that is how much land you're growing spinach on? Yeah, I'm doing it
bit by bit. So I haven't planted the whole land because of shortage of water and
tractors. So I'm using a hoe to plant. So I haven't planted the whole space.
Because that would be a lot of land, five acres, five football fields of land is
plenty. And you're saying that you're using a hoe to do that? Yes. Alone? No, I
have someone who's helping me and my family also. They assist on weekends when
they are off. Wow. And so tell me a little bit about that dynamic. How did you
arrive at the decision to grow those two crops? I've decided on growing spinach
simply because it's one of the easiest crops to plant. And secondly, with
harvesting spinach, you can harvest more than three to four times on one plant.
So that's why I decided on that. And with pumpkin, it doesn't really depend on
water daily. So we're depending on rainwater when it comes to the pumpkin. And
what sort of money are you making from this stuff? It's not really a lot of
money that I'm making because of planting on small portions, but I'm hoping to
go bigger as time goes on. So is this what you do full time? No, I do it on
weekends because I've got a seven to four job that I'm also doing. That's
interesting because a lot of people struggle to make money, real money from
agribusiness, right? So is that the reason why you're not doing it real time
because it hasn't gotten to a place where you can rely on it completely? Yeah,
it hasn't gotten really to that far, but I'm hoping that one day I'll be able to
plant my whole two hectares. Courage, way to go. Amen. This got some really nice
Facebook responses from you. And here's Chris in Australia. Hi, I'm Chris from
rural Victoria. If the young folk involved in these enterprises think about the
major fixed costs of agriculture and the key choke points, they'll realise that
collective action, and I don't mean collectivisation, will drive their
businesses further and faster. Good on them, they, for having a red hot go.
Please join the conversation on this story and others by finding us at BBC World
Service on Facebook, Twitter, YouTube or on Instagram. If you're a TikToker,
have a look for us at BBC News and do sign up for our weekly BBC World Service
newsletter. It'll help you stay up to date on all our new podcasts and
programmes. You can find details of how to subscribe for free on our website at
bbcworldservice.com. Thank you very much for listening and thank you for your
clicks, comments and reactions. The presenter was me, Anna Doble, and the
producer was Elizabeth Foster. It's time to hear what you think of the BBC World
Service in Over To You. This week, World Questions is the programme that puts a
country's people at the very heart of the debate, and a recent edition looked at
the social challenges being faced by the people of Iceland. The show's series
producer answers listeners' comments and reveals behind-the-scenes secrets of
how it's made. I'm Rajan Datta, and this is Over To You. So, it's a show that's
all about tackling pressing questions in countries around the world. Host Johnny
Diamond and the team were recently in Iceland's capital, Reykjavik, with a
public audience and panel of leading politicians and commentators to debate the
big issues facing this ancient democracy. Let us go to our first question, and
it comes from Payal Shah. Payal? Well, it's been said that the Icelandic labour
market needs a lot of immigrants in order to make... Hello, Over To You. This is
John Fehlauer in San Antonio, Texas. I thought the segment was interesting, with
a good discussion from various points of view presented by the panel. The
moderator did a good job occasionally exploring the question or response, and
probing the questioner when he thought that would help. As I am unfamiliar with
Icelandic names, it was also helpful to me that the moderator occasionally
mentioned the segment of society represented by the panellists he called on, so
I could better understand the context of their answer. The mayor says the
parliament should be acting on this, you're in the parliament, you're foreign
minister. Why are you allowing whaling to continue when clearly people... I was
struck by the fact that many of the issues facing Iceland are the same ones we
have here in the US. Immigration, inflation... Culture change, even though the
details are different. Iceland has a population much smaller than even San
Antonio's, which makes their problems and possible solutions much more personal.
I do hope that Iceland and other countries find ways to keep their cultures
unique. One listener's view there. And I'm joined now by World Questions series
producer, Charlie Taylor. Hello, Charlie. Hi, Roger. Let me bring in our
listener, Gilbert Banda from Lusaka in Zambia. Gilbert, hello. Hello, how are
you? Very well, thank you. Tell me what you think about World Questions. I would
like one day to have this programme in one of the African countries. Well,
that's something that we're going to ask Charlie in a moment. But you've got
three questions, haven't you, to ask Charlie. Fire ahead with one. My first
question is, how locations such as Iceland are chosen? Well, we choose countries
for a variety of different reasons and we try and vary where we go. So we hit
different regions, different peoples, different continents. It was Iceland this
month and next month we'll be in Iraq. So we're going from a very developed
democracy to a democracy which is still developing. The reason we picked Iceland
is because when you focus on a smaller country, sometimes you can see the sort
of microcosm of the big issues that other countries see and you can see them
more clearly and plainly. And I think that was beautifully illustrated by John
Flauer from the US, who left his voice message when he was talking about the
threats to culture, which is obviously felt in Iceland because they're a country
of 400,000 and they want to protect their language. What about Gilbert's point?
Have you been to Zambia, for example, his home country? I haven't been to
Zambia, but we have been and perhaps, well, Gilbert could tell me whether or not
it would be a good place for us to go, but we have been to several African
countries, many in sub-Saharan Africa, Kenya, Botswana, Ethiopia, South Africa.
And of course, you get very different debates in different countries, but we get
a really good, strong response from our audience there. Do you think, Gilbert,
would Zambia be a good place where we could have a free and open debate in your
country, in Lusaka, perhaps? I would love to have this programme here in Lusaka.
It will be the first time, I guess, and I can't wait to have it one day here.
OK, you're going to be in the audience, I hope, Gilbert. Let's go to your second
question. What is the criteria for the panel selection? That's a really good
question. There are lots of different criteria. What we're trying to do is to
balance the panel, so have different voices there, different opinions, different
genders, different ages sometimes, different ethnicities, depending on the
country we're in. It's great for people to have the opportunity to speak truth
to power, for people to come and make their points directly to the person whose
responsibility it is to serve them. And that is part of the ethos of World
Questions. So if we can have somebody senior who will come and stand up and
present their opinions and meet the challenges and the opportunities of speaking
to a live audience, that's brilliant. So Gilbert, tell me your third and final
question. How do you select the audience? That is a great question because we
don't select the audience. They select themselves. So what we do, and it's
difficult because, you know, you want to have a free and open audience and our
audience, we always think of the audience as being the fifth panelist. So we
have four people on the stage and one voice in the room, which is the audience.
So it's important that they're not biased. So we advertise widely on social
media to everybody of whatever background, political interest or social economic
background. And then they choose. So it's the people who select themselves. So
it's a self-selecting audience. OK, Gilbert. So the challenge is down for you to
basically send Charlie an idea for the panel, who would be on the panel in your
view, and a list of issues and questions. And then you can do most of Charlie's
work for him and set up the programme in Zambia. I can't wait to have this kind
of a programme here in Zambia. Thank you for having me on the programme. I
really appreciate for your time and thank you for answering my questions. We
really appreciate you. And thank you so much for listening to the programme.
Gilbert Banda in Lusaka in Zambia. Thank you very much indeed. Charlie Taylor,
thank you very much indeed for coming in. Thank you, Rajan. Next, and we need
your help. Discovery is coming to the end of a six-part series called Bad Blood,
in which Adam Rutherford looks into the often controversial story of eugenics.
This is the story of an idea, a powerful and troubling idea, which is born in a
Victorian quest for a better society, but reaches a horrifying climax in the
death camps of Nazi Germany. This is the story of eugenics, its dark history and
its troubling present. Now next week, we hope to have the show's production team
with us in the studio to answer your questions and comments about how this
series was made. And we'd like to put to them your questions and feedback. So do
please get in touch. Contact details in a moment. But first, here are some
examples of the comments we've already had. This is Deborah Shaw. It's such a
well-researched series on eugenics and traces its history from Britain to the US
and Nazi Germany. A difficult task for Adam Rutherford and programme makers is
the exposition and dismantling of these dangerous ideas of men who are in some
cases still revered. I am Ngugi Mwoneki from Nairobi, Kenya. The recent Bad
Blood series on BBC Discovery must be personally one of the most captivating,
well-researched and expertly delivered series of all time. This is Melanie
Lenihan in the United States. I think the Discovery series Bad Blood would be a
very worthy teaching tool to understand the history and the dangers of eugenics.
This is Stephanie Bigot. What I found most disturbing about the recent Bad Blood
series on eugenics was that one small bit of scientific knowledge on how genes
work was misused over the span of 200 years to justify carrying out crimes
against other people. Email overtoyou at bbc.co.uk or you can tweet at Overtoyou
BBC. And with that, it's time to bid you farewell. I'm Rajan Datta, the producer
is Howard Channon and we'll be back with more of your feedback at the same time
next week. This is the BBC World Service with the invention of Russia. We're
telling the story of the largest country in the world. In episode three of the
series, Catherine the Great comes to power when her husband is murdered. She was
very involved in the coup but not necessarily. We are making changes to the way
BBC live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms and the
BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you
are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC sounds....adapted screenplay, what it means to be
nominated and what it took to get there. The newsroom is next.