TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at Midnight, this is Neil Nunes. A judge has said that police failures
to trace Wayne Cousins after he indecently exposed himself fed his dangerous
sense of invincibility before he murdered Sarah Everard. His victims say Ms
Everard could have been saved if he had been arrested. Friends of five people
whose car crashed beside a major road in Cardiff, killing three of them, have
questioned why it took police up to 48 hours to find the wreckage and the two
survivors inside. The Home Secretary says the government is pushing the
boundaries of international law to stop asylum seekers crossing the Channel in
small boats. The most senior hospital doctors in England are to be balloted on
strike action in the latest pay dispute threatening to disrupt the NHS. Also
tonight, one of Britain's most notorious prisoners, Charles Bronson, tells a
public parole hearing that he is sick of porridge and wants to go home. Victims
of Wayne Cousins who murdered Sarah Everard have said he could have been stopped
if their reports of indecent exposure had been properly investigated. The former
Metropolitan Police officer, who is already serving a whole life sentence, has
been jailed for a further 19 months after pleading guilty to three charges. The
offences took place in the months before he abducted, raped and killed Ms
Everard. Some of his victims gave emotional statements at the Old Bailey, with
one saying she had survivor's guilt. The Met has apologised and said it could
have done more and will do so in future. Our special correspondent Lucy Manning
was in court. As Wayne Cousins sat with his head bowed on the video link from
Franklin Prison, the Old Bailey heard the former police officer had repeatedly
exposed himself in the weeks and days leading up to Sarah Everard's murder. In
November 2020, he stood naked in front of a woman and masturbated as she cycled
along a narrow lane in woodland between Deal and Dover. Three months later, he
exposed himself at least twice at a McDonald's drive-thru. The last time was
just four days before kidnapping Ms Everard in London. His number plate was
passed to the police, but they didn't check it in time. His victims described to
the court how it had left them feeling threatened and fearful. One of the
McDonald's workers sobbed, as she said she felt the Met Police didn't properly
investigate what Cousins had done to her days before Sarah's murder. We have
used a different voice to protect her identity. I had no one contact me or ask
me for a statement. It was only after Sarah's murder that I became involved. If
he had been held accountable when we reported the crime, we could have say
Sarah. The judge, Mrs Justice May, was also damning about the failures to
investigate Cousins. The fact that no police came to find him or his black car
to question him about these incidents can only have served to confirm and
strengthen in the defendant's mind a dangerous belief in his invincibility, in
his power sexually to dominate and abuse women without being stopped. The
Metropolitan Police and Kent Police now have investigations into their own
failures to uncover Cousins' sex offences. The Deputy Assistant Commissioner of
the Met, Stuart Cundey, apologised. Like many, I wish that Wayne Cousins had
been arrested for these offences before he went on to rape and murder Sarah
Everard. And for that I'm sorry. I recognise that the confidence, the trust in
us as the Met Police and the trust in our ability to respond is something that
we've got to earn back. Another police officer who investigated the murder of
Miss Everard, Detective Chief Inspector Catherine Goodwin, has thanked the
victims who came forward, saying they showed strength and dignity in the face of
Cousins' attempts to scare and demean. In total, detectives have identified six
incidents of indecent exposure linked to Cousins before he murdered Sarah
Everard. But despite most of the victims reporting each case to the police, no
further action was taken. Our Holman Legal Correspondent Dominic Cacciani has
been looking at whether the offence has been taken seriously enough. For almost
two centuries, indecent exposure was often brushed aside as a minor offence,
with offenders prosecuted under antiquated nuisance laws from Georgia and
Britain. Today it's a sexual offence, but critics say it's still not taken
seriously enough. Just 458 men were convicted in 2021, about 5% of the annual
number of incidents. Only a quarter of them were jailed, and mostly for less
than six months. Yet research from the US shows up to 10% of men who expose
themselves escalate to physical sexual assaults, and experts say many of this
group may be showing warning signs years before they attack. Cousins' first
known incident was in Dover in 2015 when he was in the civil nuclear
constabulary. A Kent police officer is facing a disciplinary hearing over how
that report was handled, given detectives later realised Cousins could have been
identified. Had he been caught, he would have been sacked. No one can say he
would not have gone on to kill, but it might have been harder for him to present
himself as a police officer and trick Sarah Everard into his car. Three people
who were reported missing have been found dead in a crashed car in woodland off
a main road in Cardiff. Two others have been taken to hospital with serious
injuries. The group was reported missing on Saturday after they failed to return
from a night out, but the vehicle was only discovered in the early hours of
Monday near a busy roundabout on the A48. Our Wales correspondent Howell
Griffith spent the day at the scene. Flowers and balloons mark the spot near
where the car was found in a thicket of trees in the early hours of this
morning, around 48 hours after the group were last seen. They started their
night out in Newport on Friday night, driving for more than 70 miles around
south Wales before reaching Cardiff in the early hours of Saturday. Over the
weekend, their families had appealed on social media for help in finding them,
but it wasn't until yesterday that the police search was launched. Eve Smith,
Darcy Ross and Raphael Jeanne, all in their 20s, were found dead. Sophie Russon
and Shane Loughlin are in hospital with serious injuries. Tamsin Samuels was
friends with two of the women, Eve and Darcy, and says they felt officers
ignored their calls for help. They weren't listening to us when we said we know
this is not like the girls, yeah they like a party but they weren't going to go
out for that long and not contact any of us. So it was out of character? 100%.
And I think the police could have done a lot, lot more. A lot more. And how does
it feel to be here now to see this place? I mean, to bury your friend at 20, 21,
no one should do that. The crashed car has been removed and the police cordon
taken down. The case has been referred to the Independent Office for Police
Conduct in line with normal procedure. The government is to introduce
legislation later today aimed at stopping asylum seekers crossing the English
Channel in small boats. It would place a new duty on the Home Secretary to
remove anyone who enters the country illegally. Government sources say that this
would take precedence in law over the right to claim asylum in the UK. Here's
our political correspondent Ian Watson. Just five years ago, fewer than 300
migrants crossed the Channel in small boats. Last year, more than 45,000
undertook the hazardous crossing. And as the numbers grew, so too did the
political pressure on the government. Introducing a new law to stop small boats
was announced as one of the Prime Minister's priorities in January. Writing in
Today's Sun newspaper, he says a new law will send a signal that anyone entering
the country illegally will be swiftly removed. This new duty to remove would be
given precedence over existing legislation on asylum and human rights, though
there'd be exemptions for under 18s and those with serious medical conditions.
The Home Secretary, Suelle Braverman, has said the government's pushing the
boundaries of international law to solve the small boats crisis and ministers
are expected to acknowledge that there's a risk of a clash with some aspects of
the Human Rights Act. Critics have questioned whether there is the capacity to
detain a high number of people prior to removal. Labour says the government's
approach is unworkable because there are too few agreements with other countries
for the return of refugees and that more should be done to tackle the criminal
gangs who ferry asylum seekers across the Channel. Darling Street says Rishi
Sunak has spoken by phone to the Rwandan President Paul Kagame to discuss the
plan to send asylum seekers there. A spokesperson said the leaders had committed
to continue working together on the arrangement. The Doctors' Union is to ballot
consultants in England on strike action in their dispute about pay and pensions.
The British Medical Association says 35,000 of the most senior doctors will be
asked to vote on industrial action after a poll suggested almost nine in ten
members were in favour. Our health reporter Jim Reid has more details. The BMA
said any strike action would mean the most senior hospital doctors running a
bank holiday service on weekdays. In practice, that is likely to mean urgent and
emergency care would continue but outpatient appointments, routine surgery and
some other treatments would be put on hold. The union said a full ballot of its
members would take place around the middle of April with a series of strike
dates likely in the spring depending on the outcome. Dr Vishal Sharma is the
chair of the BMA's consultants committee. Consultants in England are all too
aware that our take-home pay has fallen by 35% in real terms since 2008-2009.
That's the equivalent of working four months of the year for free. Junior
doctors who make up every grade below consultant level are expected to start
their strike action next Monday while fresh talks are to begin tomorrow between
the government and groups representing nurses, ambulance workers and midwives in
England. Unions have warned that industrial action, which is currently
suspended, could resume if progress is not made by the end of the week. Rail
companies have threatened to pull out of national talks with the RMT union
unless its members are allowed to vote on the most recent offer to end strikes.
The Transport Secretary Mark Harper has also urged the union to let members
consider the deal from the rail delivery group. The RMT is due to strike again
next Thursday as part of the long-running dispute over pay and conditions. Our
transport correspondent Katie Austin reports. Since the RMT's national executive
committee rejected what the government and employers called best and final
offers last month, the dispute has in effect ground to a halt. The government
and industry have maintained reforms are needed in exchange for any pay
increase, but the RMT asked for an unconditional pay offer and no detrimental
changes. The union said it consulted extensively before the rejection, but the
rail delivery group has now made clear that if members aren't given a vote,
something a smaller union, the TSSA, has done, national level talks may stop and
negotiations would have to be started with individual train companies instead.
Network Rail's boss Andrew Haynes has also questioned the point of resuming
talks following previous frustrations. The RMT has said it is focused on coming
to a negotiated settlement. Firefighters have voted overwhelmingly to accept a
new pay offer ending the threat of strikes. The new deal includes a 7% increase
backdated to July last year, plus an extra 5% from July this year. The fire
brigade's union called the result a testament to the power of collective action.
The Director-General of the Confederation of British Industry, Tony Danker, has
stepped aside while an investigation takes place into his conduct at work. The
CBI says it's been made aware of new reports about his behaviour after
complaints were made earlier this year. Our business correspondent, S. Essel
Karr, has more. The CBI is one of the UK's largest business groups, representing
around 190,000 firms. The man at the head of the organisation, Tony Danker,
regularly acts as the voice of business at the highest levels of government.
It's emerged that last Thursday the CBI was made aware of new reports about Mr
Danker's workplace conduct. He's stepped aside while an independent
investigation is carried out. The CBI has also revealed that a previous
allegation concerning Mr Danker was made in January. It says it was thoroughly
investigated and didn't warrant a disciplinary process. The Guardian newspaper
had approached the CBI over the complaints, which it understood claims from a
female employee that Mr Danker made unwanted contact with her and she considered
this unwanted contact to be sexual harassment. Mr Danker has posted a statement
on Twitter saying that he is mortified to hear that he's caused offence or
anxiety to any colleague, adding that it was completely unintentional and he
apologised profusely. He says he's cooperating fully with the investigation. One
of Britain's most violent offenders, Charles Bronson, has told a public parole
board hearing that he is a born-again artist and no longer angry. The 70-year-
old, who now uses the name Charles Salvador, has spent most of the past 50 years
in jail. His prison offender manager said he would not be able to cope if he was
freed. Our Home Affairs correspondent Daniel Sanford watched the hearing.
Bronson was born Martin Peterson and was first jailed for armed robbery in 1974,
almost 50 years ago. Since then, apart from a couple of short breaks, he's spent
his whole life in prison. He became notorious for taking 11 hostages while
inside and for a series of prison rooftop protests. In 1999, Bronson held an art
teacher hostage for almost two days and at that point he was jailed for life.
His parole hearing is only the second ever to be held in public. He was sat with
the parole board panel and his lawyer in prison in Milton Keynes, with the media
and the public watching via a video link at the Royal Courts of Justice in
London. His prison offender manager told the hearing that there have been fewer
outbursts in recent years and he was less violent. But she said he didn't have
the skills to cope with being released from jail. He spends around 23 hours a
day in his cell and only mixes with three other inmates. With a shaved head and
a handlebar moustache and wearing a suit and round sunglasses, Bronson himself
gave evidence at length in a gravelly voice. He started by saying, I've had more
porridge than Goldilocks and the Three Bears and I'm sick of it. I've had enough
of it and I want to go home. The hearing was punctuated by laughter. It had only
been going an hour when Bronson said, I'm getting bored, mate. When asked about
hostage taking, he said, there's nothing like wrapping a governor up like a
Christmas turkey. The parole board has to decide whether he's safe to be
released from prison or perhaps moved to an open prison. Bronson finished his
evidence by saying, give me a chance, a break, to prove to you people that I'm
just a normal geezer wanting to get on with his life. Former colleagues of the
Deputy Prime Minister Dominic Raab have spoken to BBC News about their
experiences as an inquiry into bullying allegations against him reaches its
final stages. Dozens of people, including Mr Raab, have given evidence to the
investigation led by the senior lawyer, Adam Tali KC. Mr Raab, who is also
Justice Secretary, has strongly denied the claims. Here's our political
correspondent, Ione Wells. Dominic Raab faces eight formal complaints from his
time at three government departments involving at least 24 different people who
cannot speak publicly while the investigation is ongoing. We've spoken to others
who worked closely with Mr Raab. Their words are spoken by BBC producers.
Somebody who advised him in a senior role claimed his behaviour impacted not
just people but policy too, as it had the effect of shutting up those who were
supposed to advise him. I didn't personally feel bullied. I did observe though
what I would characterise as bullying behaviour. He was somebody who expected
high standards of people. He however was pretty belittling in terms of how he
would go about those things and he would frequently humiliate members of his
private office. At a flick of a switch he could turn incredibly angry and pretty
offensive. One former parliamentary staff member said Mr Raab wasn't a bully but
the reports about him sounded familiar. There were a handful of occasions where
I observed him make a member of staff cry because he was not happy with their
work. If a member of his staff had delivered some work which he didn't think was
at the standard it should have been, he could tear it apart, frankly, literally
at times. Literally, as in literally rip up people's work? I did observe that.
But another parliamentary staff member and one official we spoke to who has
given evidence to the inquiry said the allegations did not make sense to them.
He was always very focused on the job but always super nice. And what was your
response when you heard about media reports accusing him of bullying? I was sad
because it didn't correlate at all with my experience in the slightest. It's
hard work because he's a perfectionist and he will go above and beyond to
deliver for a department where he wants to make changes. The lawyer
investigating allegations about Mr Raab's behaviour will present his findings
for the Prime Minister to judge. Mr Raab has said he will resign if the
complaints are upheld. The government has called into question whether the
former civil servant Sue Gray followed the rules when she accepted a job as
Chief of Staff to the Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer. The Cabinet Office
Minister Jeremy Quinn told MPs his department was looking into the circumstances
of her resignation. Ms Gray led the investigation into parties in Downing Street
during lockdown. Here's our political correspondent Jonathan Blake. Sue Gray's
move to work for Labour was exceptional and unprecedented, Mr Quinn said,
responding to a question from the former Attorney General Sir Robert Buckland,
who said many Conservative MPs had been surprised and disappointed, the Minister
said the impartiality of the civil service was constitutionally vital. Rules
stated, he said, that the appointments watchdog ACOBA had to approve any job
offer before it was announced, and that the Cabinet Office had not yet been told
that Ms Gray had notified officials. He also raised the requirement for civil
servants to declare outside interests and get permission to contact opposition
parties. Labour's Deputy Leader Angela Rayner accused the government of
indulging in the conspiracy theories of Boris Johnson. Sir Keir Starmer said
there was nothing improper about hiring Sue Gray, but wouldn't confirm when he
first approached her about becoming his Chief of Staff, only that it was recent
and after the Partygate investigation had concluded. Ukraine's President
Zelensky says he has told his forces to bolster the defences of the besieged
eastern city of Bakhmut, which has been virtually flattened after six months of
Russian attacks. There have been reports suggesting Ukrainian troops have
started to withdraw from the area. Our correspondent James Landale reports from
Kiev. President Zelensky said the fighting in eastern Ukraine was painful and
challenging. That's because Ukrainian soldiers are dying to protect a city that
largely lies in ruins. Independent analysts have suggested Ukraine might be
considering a limited withdrawal from eastern Bakhmut. But Mr Zelensky met
senior commanders and his office said they spoke in favour of continuing the
defensive operation and strengthening their positions in the city. He and they
know this battle is costing the lives of thousands of Russian soldiers and they
hope their enemy will emerge substantially weaker, regardless of who ends up
controlling the city. Russia has reportedly been making some advances, but there
is further evidence of divisions between the Russian army and the private
mercenaries leading much of the assault. Evgeny Prigozhin, the head of the
Wagner Group, accused Russia's defence ministry of failing to give his fighters
the ammunition they needed. Universities in Afghanistan have begun reopening
after a winter break but female students are not returning to campuses. They are
banned from studying under a series of restrictions imposed on women since the
Taliban seized power a year and a half ago. Our correspondent in the region,
Barbara Platasha, has this report. The ban was announced in December, but the
new term is another painful reminder to young women of how their world has
shrunk under the Taliban. One female student told the BBC she'd cried all night.
Others have called on male students to boycott classes until universities are
open for all. That doesn't appear to have happened so far, but some young men
have said a way should be found to let the women study. And Islam does allow
that, argued another female student, calling this gender discrimination. Several
Taliban officials say the ban is temporary. The education ministry has talked
about the need to first provide a suitable environment, and there is evidence of
disagreement within the ultra-conservative government about this issue. But it
has steadily rolled back women's rights and freedoms in education, jobs and
other areas. Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei has condemned a series
of poisonings targeting schoolgirls and women at university as an unforgivable
crime. Hundreds of incidents involving toxic gas have been reported across Iran
since the end of November. In his first public comments on the attacks,
Ayatollah Khamenei said there would be no amnesty for anyone involved. The
former heads of Israel's air force have written to the Prime Minister, Benjamin
Netanyahu, urging him to abandon his plans for significant changes to the
country's justice system. They describe the government's proposals as a grave
threat to national security. Mr. Netanyahu has faced weeks of street protests by
critics who say he is trying to undermine the independence of the judiciary and
weaken democracy. In an unprecedented move, fighter pilot reservists from an
elite air force squadron have refused to attend training. Our Middle East
correspondent Tom Bateman reports from Jerusalem. Nearly all of the reservist
pilots in the Israeli Air Force's 69th squadron have refused to join a one-day
training exercise this week. One unnamed pilot told the Israeli press they were
signalling that, "...we don't want to serve a dictatorial regime." It is being
seen as an unparalleled political move by some of the most strategically
important reservists and a sign of how opposition to Mr. Netanyahu's planned
legal overhaul is spreading. Reservists are a key component of the military and
many in other units have also threatened not to turn up for duty. Amid
increasingly fractious protests and few signs of compromise, the coalition is
pressing on with reforms it says will stop overreach by the judges. Mr.
Netanyahu is hitting back at the boycott. He tweeted a photo of his military ID
from 1967, saying, "...when we are called for reserve duty, we always turn up.
We are one nation." The broadcasting regulator Ofcom has found that the
television channel GB News broke its rules when a presenter made what it called
potentially harmful and misleading claims about Covid-19 vaccines. Mark Stein,
who has since left the channel, claimed last April that booster jabs increased
people's risk of infection, serious illness and death. GB News denies misleading
the public, saying it was merely challenging official narratives. In the city,
the 100 share index ended the day 17 points lower at 7,930. On Wall Street, the
Dow Jones closed up 40 points at 33,431. On the currency markets, the pound is
trading at $1.203, against the euro sterling is at 1.126. That makes a euro
worth 88.8 pence. Archaeologists have discovered a Roman shrine beneath a former
graveyard next to Leicester Cathedral. The recent dig took place ahead of the
construction of a new centre for tourists visiting the tomb of Richard III,
whose remains were found less than 50 metres away. Our Midlands correspondent
Phil Mackie has been to the site. There was a constant clattering of picks,
trowels and wheelbarrows as the team of 10 archaeologists from the University of
Leicester worked to finish excavating the site before it was handed over to the
builders. They uncovered hundreds of artefacts, but the most exciting find was a
broken altar base. It was found in the basement of a large Roman building and
probably formed part of a pagan shrine. Matthew Morris, who unearthed Richard
III's remains in 2013, was in charge of this dig too. This is our star find at
the minute. This, we're pretty certain, is going to be the base of a Roman
altar. The find at least partially explains a local legend that the cathedral
had been built on the site of a Roman temple. They also unearthed coins dating
to the first and fourth centuries and fragments of Gaulish pottery. More than
1,100 sets of human remains were recovered because the site was used as a
graveyard. All have been removed for further study and will eventually be
reburied. A former Mexican beauty queen and her partner who fled Spain after
stealing 45 bottles of fine wine have both been jailed for four years. The wine
was valued at nearly £1.5 million. The couple had a 14-course meal at a hotel in
the city of Cáceres, raided the wine cellar and went on the run. For a first
look at the morning papers, there's widespread coverage of the government's
announcement today of proposals to bar virtually all asylum claims from people
who cross the Channel in small boats. The Times quotes government sources
admitting that they could not say if the legislation was definitely compliant
with Britain's obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights. And
they expect it to be challenged in court. The Daily Telegraph reports that it'll
be stated in the bill that the new laws may not comply with the Convention,
although ministers believe they do. It says the Home Secretary, Suella
Brotherman, in promising to push the boundaries of international law, is
directly challenging European human rights judges. Boris Johnson's reported
nomination of his father for a knighthood is the lead in the Daily Mirror. Sunec
must stop this farce, it says. The Online Independent quotes conservatives
slamming it as outrageous and ridiculous. Its headline is, Arise, Sir Dad? The
last original member of the US rock band Leonard Skinner, Gary Rossington, has
died aged 71. The guitarist appeared on their best-known song, the nine-minute
freebird, all their albums and co-wrote their 1974 hit, Sweet Home Alabama. It's
not known how he died. Our arts correspondent, David Sillitoe, looks back at his
life and music. Originally conceived as a way of giving the vocalist, Ronnie Van
Zant, a bit of a rest, the epic freebird became the band's defining song. And it
began with Gary Rossington's sly guitar. Gary Rossington, from Jacksonville,
Florida, was one of the original members of the band, which had been named after
a PE teacher who had objected to his long hair. Their big break was supporting
The Who. It was only two weeks, but it just changed everything for us. You know,
we'd never seen so many people, especially to play in front of. It was like
crazy. That's when we first started drinking. We never drank. And it scared us
so bad, we started drinking and we got a bottle from The Who. It was his riff
that turned into another of their hits, Sweet Home Alabama. But this was a group
that had more than its share of misfortune. Gary Rossington was, in the 70s,
seriously injured in a plane crash that killed three members of the band. There
was also a near fatal car crash, drug addiction, and in recent years, heart
attacks. But he continued to perform. His last concert was in February, ending
of course with Freebird. Headlines again, Scotland Yard has apologised after a
judge said police failures to investigate Sarah Everard's murderer, Wayne
Cousins, for indecent exposure could only have fed his dangerous sense of
invincibility before the killing. Three people have been found dead in a crashed
car in Cardiff, two days after they were reported missing to police. The Home
Secretary has said new legislation to stop asylum seekers crossing the Channel
in small boats is pushing the boundaries of international law. Hospital
consultants in England are to be balloted on strike action in another pay
dispute in the NHS. One of Britain's most notorious prisoners, Charles Bronson,
has told a parole board hearing that he is no longer angry and just wants to be
released before his mother dies. BBC News. Which was read by Neil Nunez. In a
couple of minutes, Dasha Kipper's compelling exploration of dementia and its
impact on the minds of people with dementia and their children. Travellers to
unimaginable lands is our book of the week. But first, with a look at the
weather forecast, Darren Bett. Hello there. So far it's been northern Scotland
that's been in the firing line for this Arctic air that's come down from the
north. And this is where we've seen most of the snow falling. But over the next
few days, other parts of the UK will see some snow. And at the moment, we've got
this band of wet weather that's getting stuck across southern England and south
Wales. And with that colder air tucking in quickly from the north, we could see
a bit of sleet and wet snow developing in southern England and south Wales by
the morning. Further north, some clearer skies, some further snow showers
peppering Northern Ireland. A centimetre or two of snow here. Likewise in the
north east of England. Most of the snow will continue to fall in the north of
Scotland, perhaps running down the east coast of the country as well. Cold night
temperatures, perhaps as low as minus four where we have the clearer skies in
the northern half of the UK. And of course, there'll be some icy conditions as
we head into tomorrow. And it could still be quite a wet start across southern
parts of England and south Wales. We're likely to find that wetter weather just
becoming lighter and more patchy. But again, there still could be a little bit
of winter in us in there as well. Certainly going to be cold underneath the
cloud in southern parts of England and south Wales. Further north, we should see
some sunshine, but again, some further snow showers coming into northern parts
of Northern Ireland, mostly affecting northern Scotland, running down the east
coast into the north east of England. Temperature wise, well, typically three or
four degrees. It will be a cold day and with some stronger winds feeding in
those wintry showers in the north, it'll feel even colder here as well. We stay
cold overnight on Tuesday nights. Could be a really cold night, actually. A
widespread sharp frost, potentially down to minus 10 in Scotland. But we may see
a bit more snow falling across southern parts of England and Wales overnight and
into Wednesday morning. That could give a couple of centimetres in places,
easing off, but then turning wetter and windier in the far south west, bringing
more snow to the moors. A lot of cloud for Wales and the Midlands, but further
north, some sunshine, very few showers, actually the showers dying out. But
again, all of us will be cold on Wednesday. Thanks Darren. Darren Bett at the
BBC Weather Centre. And now on Radio 4, our new book of the week is Travellers
to Unimaginable Lands by Dasha Kipper. Compassionless case studies that blend
science with lived experience to explore dementia from both the patient and the
caregiver's perspective. The reader is Teresa Gallaher. When I was 25 years old,
I moved in with a man who was 98. This man, whom I'll call Mr. Kessler, wasn't a
friend or relative. He was a Holocaust survivor in the first stages of
Alzheimer's disease. And I'd been hired to look after him. Although I had a
background in clinical psychology, I was by no means a professional caregiver. I
was hired because Mr. Kessler's son, Sam, thought his father shouldn't live
alone. Once ensconced in Mr. Kessler's two-bedroom apartment in the Bronx, I
became, as so many caregivers do, a record-keeper of someone else's obsessions.
Where are my keys? Have you seen my wallet? What day is it? Where do you live?
Where do your parents live? He didn't ask these questions every day in the year
I cared for him. He asked them nine or ten times a day. Every day. I wanted to
help him, but I couldn't. I wanted him to appreciate my efforts, but he
couldn't. Some mornings Mr. Kessler knew who I was. Some mornings he did not.
Some days he resented my presence. Some days he was glad to have my company. And
some days, as if in gentle reproof to his own forgetfulness, he looked at me and
murmured, How long have I been like this? Or, Why don't I remember? Or, I don't
know how you put up with me. As Mr. Kessler teetered between knowing and not
knowing me, between wanting my company and rejecting it, between happily eating
the meals I prepared and accusing me of taking advantage of his hospitality, I
felt myself pulled between feeling useful and feeling like an intruder. His
oscillations began to tug at my own sense of existential rootlessness. Why was I
here? What was I doing? Was I doing any good at all? It was my first indication
that people with dementia disorders can still find your most vulnerable part and
poke at it until you yourself feel unraveled. One evening, about seven months
into my stay, Mr. Kessler haltingly climbed on top of a chair to change the
battery in a smoke detector. When I warned him how dangerous this was and
offered to help, he snapped, in typical fashion, that he was the boss and didn't
need help. Usually when he tried to fix things I would distract him, but this
time, for just one minute I needed him to understand that there was such a thing
as objective reality. Forget about the alarm, I said firmly. It's too dangerous.
He waved me away and put a foot on the chair. Aggravated by his condescension, I
felt an uncharacteristic urge to strip him of his delusions. I was tired of
playing this game, tired of being his co-conspirator in the belief that nothing
was wrong with him, which ironically made it easier for him to question my
presence in his home. So I did what caregivers shouldn't. I argued. Shaking with
indignation, I shouted that he didn't do anything by himself, that he always
needed my help, that he wasn't capable of living alone. Although my outburst
didn't seem to faze him and fled his memory after ten minutes, it so disturbed
me that for weeks I succumbed to apathy. I thought I was failing, perhaps not in
my duties, but as a human being. Caregivers want to re-establish a shared
reality. It's not cruelty, but desperation that drives us to confront patients
with the truth. In many cases, dementia disorders create a world so fragmented,
so skewed, so redundant, so indifferent to normal rules of behavior, that family
members outwittingly become part of the madness. Yet clinicians and researchers
continue to posit a clear distinction between the mind of the caregiver and that
of the patient, between the normal and the abnormal, when in fact the true
burden for caregivers is often the absence of such a divide. Children and
spouses do not merely witness their loved ones' cognitive decline. They become
part of it, living in its surreal, bleak reality every minute of every day. My
case studies are therefore always about two people who unknowingly collaborate
in misinterpreting the disease. Patient, I use the term patient throughout as a
shorthand for person with dementia, and caregiver. Relying on cognitive and
neurological research, as well as on my own experience, I want to show how both
patient and caregiver react to the existential dilemma created by dementia.
Sam's relationship with his father had been fractious from the time he had
announced at 21 that he was going to be a professional musician. Mr. Kessler
didn't mind Sam making noise in the house, but Sam needed to get a job first and
play music second. His job, Sam told his father, was playing the tenor sax. What
kind of job is that? Mr. Kessler's conviction that Sam was wasting his life was
relentless. Dementia was punishing them in the same way they had always punished
each other. At least once a week, I heard a version of the following. Sam, stop
trying to fix the lamp in your room. It's dangerous. Mr. Kessler, I don't touch
the lamp. I don't know what you want from me. Sam, you mess around with the lamp
and the wiring. That's how you cut your hand. Mr. Kessler, I never touch the
wires. What wires have I touched? Sam, don't argue with me. Just do as I say.
It's for your own good. Mr. Kessler, when do I argue with you? Sam, you always
argue with me. You're always giving me trouble. Mr. Kessler, no one ever said I
give anyone trouble. Sam, you're giving me trouble right now. Mr. Kessler, how?
How am I giving you trouble? Sam, you don't listen to me. And if you keep
arguing and contradicting me, I'll stop coming to see you. Mr. Kessler, I
promise. I promise I will listen to you 100%. Sam, okay. Now promise me you'll
stop touching the lamp in the bedroom. Repeat it to yourself. I will not touch
the lamp. Mr. Kessler, I never touch the lamp. What lamp? Sam, goddammit, stop
arguing with me. Mr. Kessler, when do I ever argue with you? While Mr. Kessler
would quickly forget their arguments, they accumulated in Sam's mind until his
frustration and anger boiled over, as did his guilt. Although I had grown
accustomed to feeling helpless when confronted by Mr. Kessler's distress, I
thought that surely I could help Sam. One day, after another bad fight, I took
Sam aside and showed him photographs of the healthy brain and the dementia
brain, with the hippocampus pitifully shrunk to half its normal size. Sam looked
appropriately somber. Here was indisputable evidence that his father was no
longer the person that Sam had been fighting with for decades. Yet only an hour
after Sam viewed these photographs, he and his father were shouting at each
other again. It was a lesson to me. Just as I had mistakenly regarded intimate
moments with Mr. Kessler as touchstones of closeness, I mistook Sam's moment of
clarity for long-term understanding. Who, I sometimes wondered, was suffering
more from memory loss, Sam or his father? Because memory is biased toward pre-
existing knowledge, we all edit the present to make it look like the past. No
matter what new symptoms his father presented, Sam's memory encoded his father's
behavior in a way that made him appear more consistent with the man he used to
know. Just as Alzheimer's can magnify conflict, it can also bring out affection
and tenderness. Quiet moments when arguments cease. One Sunday afternoon,
something unusual occurred. Sam offered to shave his father. At first, Mr.
Kessler declined, but sensing that his own hand was no longer steady, he
hesitantly agreed. Watching them from the doorway, I noticed that once Mr.
Kessler felt the warmth of Sam's fingers and the stroke of the razor, he began
to enjoy himself. And Sam took pleasure in Mr. Kessler's unabashed delight at
being pampered. You're like a professional barber, Mr. Kessler said, chuckling
as Sam finished up. I should pay you. And then, when Sam wiped away the last of
the lather, Mr. Kessler leaned into him and sighed, oh, that's good. Sam, I
knew, looked forward to these 15 minutes when he and his father could be
together. So it came as a jolt when, during one of their sessions, Mr. Kessler,
after telling Sam that he should be paid, casually added, you need the money,
don't you? Your hobby keeps you poor. Taken aback, Sam felt a familiar surge of
anger and quickly stepped away from the sink. Mr. Kessler, unsure what had
happened, turned his head and asked, what's wrong? Why did you stop? Sam said
nothing. Stolledly, he began shaving his father again. Alzheimer's not only kept
Mr. Kessler's image of himself intact, it also preserved an outdated image of
Sam. Over the years, I've encountered a lot of anger from caregivers. Sam was
just one of many whose anger was constantly being rekindled by a patient's
moving in and out of awareness. It's almost axiomatic that in troubled
relationships, caregivers would rather hold on to their anger than accept the
pain of losing someone. And this reluctance to let go is only exacerbated by a
disease that creates just enough ambiguity in a patient's behavior to keep
caregivers from facing their grief. One evening, as Sam helped his father get
into bed, Mr. Kessler looked up and said in a kindly tone, who are you?
Startled, Sam replied, your son. My son? Mr. Kessler said wonderingly. How long
have you been my son? Well, I guess 62 years now, Sam said, feeling both alarmed
and amused. Mr. Kessler's eyes widened. 62 years you've been my son and only now
you're telling me? Sam laughed. Well, sometimes it slips my mind. Seeing his son
laugh caused Mr. Kessler to laugh as well. Later, a grim looking Sam found me in
the kitchen. I'm a jerk, he muttered. Why do I continue arguing with him? He
doesn't even know who I am. Our minds abhor ambiguity. And as long as a
patient's memory flickers on and off, we tend to see what we want to see. As I
continue to observe Sam's seesawing reactions to his father's intermittent and
fluctuating recall, I realize that it's not the absence of a memory system that
frustrates and confounds caregivers, but rather its fragmentation. Given the way
a normal memory functions, memory loss in someone we know well feels less like a
neurological deficit than an act of betrayal. After all, when patients forget,
it's the caregivers who end up feeling erased. Their words, efforts, and
sacrifices often going unacknowledged and even denied by their patients. It's
why so many caregivers feel they're being gaslighted. Without the other person's
memory working alongside our own, collaborating with us on facts and events,
we're left shaky and unsure of what's real, of what's to be trusted and not
trusted. Memory loss does not just create ambiguity. It impedes the possibility
of growth, of repair, of accountability, of achieving closure. Travelers to
Unimaginable Lands by Adasha Kipper continues at the same time tomorrow. It was
read by Teresa Gallaher and abridged by Christine Entwistle. The producer is
Kirsty Williams. Shipping forecast follows in a moment. Shipping forecast
follows in a moment. Shipping forecast follows in a moment. And now on BBC Radio
4, the shipping forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and
Coast Guard Agency at 0015 on Tuesday, 7 March. There are warnings of gales in
South Otsira, Forties, Dogger, Fisher, German Bight, Humber, Biskay, Fitzroy and
South East Iceland. The general synopsis at 1800. Low forties, 989, expected
Baltic Sea, 975 by 1800 Tuesday. Low Fitzroy, 1006, losing its identity. The
area forecasts for the next 24 hours. Viking, North Otsira, northerly or
northeasterly, 4 to 6, becoming variable 2 to 4 later, squally snow showers,
good, occasionally very poor. South Otsira, Forties, northeasterly, backing
northwesterly, mainly 4 to 6, but 7 or gale 8 at first and south east, squally
snow showers, good, occasionally very poor. Cromartie, Forth Tyne, West Dogger,
northerly or northwesterly, 4 to 6, squally snow showers, good, occasionally
very poor. East Dogger, Fisher, German Bight, Cyplanic 7 to severe gale 9,
becoming northwesterly 4 to 6, rain or snow, then squally snow showers, good,
occasionally very poor. Humber, Thames, northwesterly, mainly 3 to 5, but 6 to
gale 8 at first and north east Humber, occasional rain, then sleeter snow
showers, moderate or good, occasionally very poor. Dover, White, West 4 to 6,
veering north east 2 to 4 later, rain or showers, good, occasionally poor.
Portland, Plymouth, West to south west, 4 to 6, becoming variable 3, then east 4
to 6 later, rain or showers, good, occasionally poor. Biscay, variable 3,
becoming south west 4 or 5, increasing 6 to gale 8 later, fair, then rain, good,
occasionally poor. Trafalgar, westerly, backing south westerly, 3 to 5,
increasing 6 later in north west, occasional rain, good, occasionally poor.
Fitzroy, Sol, Cyplanic 4 to 6, becoming south west 6 to gale 8 later in Fitzroy,
occasional rain, good, occasionally poor. Lundy, Fasnet, Cyplanic 4 to 6,
becoming north east 3 to 5, veering east 4 to 6 later, rain, then wintry
showers, good, occasionally poor. Irish Sea, north or north west, 3 to 5, rain,
then snow showers, good, occasionally very poor. Shannon, variable 2 to 4 at
first and south, otherwise north easterly, 5 to 7, perhaps gale 8 later in south
west, rain, then wintry showers, good, occasionally poor. Rockhall, Mallon,
Hebrides, Bailey, Fair Isle, fair oars in south east Iceland. Northerly or north
easterly, 5 to 7, occasionally gale 8 in south east Iceland, decreasing 4 times
elsewhere, squally snow showers, moderate or good, occasionally very poor, light
icing in south east Iceland. And now the weather reports from coastal stations
for 2300 on the 6th of March. Tyree, automatic, north east by north, 6, recent
precipitation, 22 miles, 1004, now rising. Stornoway, north by west, 5, heavy
rain and snow, 900 metres, 1005, rising slowly. Lerwick, north north east, 4,
rain, 22 miles, 1001, falling slowly. Wick, automatic, north north east, 5, 12
miles, 1002, falling slowly. Aberdeen, north by west, 3, slight snow, 22 miles,
1000, falling slowly. Lucas, north west by north, 3, more than 38 miles, 1001,
falling slowly. Boomer, north north west, 3, 999, now falling. Bridlington, west
north west, 3, 998, falling slowly. Sandedy, light vessel, automatic, west, 5,
11 miles, 1001. St Catharines Point, automatic, west by south, 5, 1002, falling
slowly. Jersey, west south west, 4, 16 miles, 1005, falling slowly. Channel
Light Vessel, automatic, at 2200 hours, west south west, 4, 1004. Tilly
Automatic, west, 3, recent rain, 30 miles, 1004, falling. Milford Haven, north,
1, more than 38 miles, 1001, falling more slowly. Aberporth, north east, 3,
slight rain, 6 miles, 1001, falling slowly. Valley, north west by north, 3, 16
miles, 1002, falling slowly. Liverpool Crosby, north west, 4, missed, 4 miles,
1000, falling slowly. Valencia, north west by west, 2, recent drizzle, 19 miles,
1003, falling. Ronalds Way, north by west, 3, 1001, falling slowly. Mallinhead,
north north east, 5, recent rain, 14 miles, 1004, now rising. And McRahanish
Automatic, north east by north, 2, more than 38 miles, 1002, now rising. And
here's the weather forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, valid for the following 24 hours, issued by the Met Office at 2300 on
Monday the 6th of March. The general situation, a cold front is currently
spreading outbreaks of rain or sleet slowly southwards across England and Wales,
but will become slow moving over the English Channel on Tuesday, before
returning north eastwards during Wednesday. Further north, a very cold and
unstable northerly airflow will continue, with squally snow showers affecting
many areas. Cape Wrath to Rattray Head, including Orkney, north and north east,
5 to 7, backing north and north west, 3 to 5, snow showers, squally at first,
good, occasionally very poor. Rattray Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed, north and
north west, 4 or 5, occasionally 6 at first, decreasing 3 at times later, snow
showers, squally at first, good, occasionally very poor. Berwick-upon-Tweed to
Whitby, north and north west, 4 to 6, decreasing 3 later, squally snow showers,
good, occasionally very poor. Whitby to Gibraltar Point, north westerly, 4 or 5,
occasionally 6 at first and north, decreasing 3 at times later, sleet showers,
then snow showers, good, occasionally very poor. Gibraltar Point to North
Foreland, westerly or north westerly, 3 to 5, becoming variable 2 to 4 later,
occasional rain or sleet, then sleet or snow showers, moderate or good,
occasionally very poor. North Foreland to Celtsey Bill, westerly or south
westerly, 4 to 6, veering northerly 2 to 4, then easterly or north easterly, 3
to 5 later, occasional rain with sleet at times later, moderate or good,
occasionally poor. Celtsey Bill to Lyme Regis, west or south west, 4 to 6,
veering north or north east, 2 to 4, then east or north east, 4 to 6 later, rain
at times, moderate or good, occasionally poor. Lyme Regis to Land's End,
including the Isles of Scilly, west veering north east, 3 to 5, then veering
east, 4 to 6 later, rain at times, moderate or good. Land's End to St David's
Head, including the Bristol Channel, cyclonic 4 to 6, becoming north east, 2 to
4, veering east, 3 to 5 later, rain or sleet at times, then showers later,
perhaps wintry, moderate or good, occasionally poor. St David's Head to Great
Orm Head, including St George's Channel, north or north east, 3 or 4, increasing
5 at times, veering east or north east, 2 to 4 later, rain or sleet, then sleet
or snow showers, moderate or good, occasionally poor. Great Orm Head to the Mull
of Galloway, north or north west, 3 or 4, increasing 5 at times, veering north
or north east, 2 to 4 later, sleet showers, then snow showers, good,
occasionally very poor. Isle of Man, north or north west, 3 or 4, increasing 5
at times, veering north or north east, 2 or 3 later, sleet or snow showers,
good, occasionally poor. Loch Foyle to Carlingford Lock, northerly or north
westerly, 4 or 5, occasionally 6 at first and north, becoming variable 2 to 4
later, snow showers, squally at first and north, good, occasionally very poor.
Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre, including the Firth of Clyde and North
Channel, northerly or north westerly, 3 to 5, becoming variable 2 to 4 later,
snow showers, good, occasionally very poor. Mull of Kintyre to Ardenhamirchen
Point, north or north east, 4 or 5, occasionally 6 at first, decreasing 2 or 3
later, snow showers, squally at first, good, occasionally very poor.
Ardenhamirchen Point to Cape Wrath, north or north east, 4 or 5, occasionally 6
at first, decreasing 2 or 3 later, snow showers, squally at first, moderate or
good, occasionally very poor. And Shetland Isles, north, 5 or 6, occasionally 7
at first, decreasing 4 at times later, squally snow showers, moderate or good,
occasionally very poor. And that completes the Shipping Bulletin. And looking
ahead to later this morning here on Radio 4, Helen Lewis meets more people
offering radical solutions to some of the big problems of our times in the new
series of The Spark. Each week she has an in-depth conversation exploring a big
idea about subjects, including when to quit, scientific fraud and preventing
suicide, and hears about some of the personal reasons behind them. The Spark on
Radio 4 and on BBC Sounds starts this morning at 11 o'clock. Well, that's it for
another day here on BBC Radio 4. On behalf of my colleague Neil Nunes in the
newsroom and myself, Al Ryan, here in Broadcasting House, if you have been,
thanks for listening. Have a safe, quiet and peaceful night, and wrap up warm.
Good night. Eoia! You