TRANSCRIPTION: KZOO_AUDIO/2023-02-19-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 lunchtime. 12 o'clock in the afternoon. It's the 6490th time. It's still dark
outside, but the sun is rising faster. Tokyo time is 6.23 today. Oh, I forgot to
drink the smiley Kanyu Shaved Ice. I'll have two. Thank you for the power. Let's
start with the headline news. The Defense Ministry announced that the Air Self-
Defense Force had a joint training with the US military yesterday. The Korean
military is also training with the US military. It is seen that it was launched
by the North Korean military. North Korea is... Was it Mars 15? What are you
thinking? The US Secretary of State said on the 18th that he had a conversation
with a major Communist Party politician in China. He said that he was unable to
deny the US's belief in the international law on the air raid in China. On the
other hand, the big knight said that he had a specific use of force for the
attack on Chinese airspace. He said that he had made a clear violation of the
international law and the civil aviation agreement, and that he had a serious
argument. I think it's your fault. Two weeks after the big earthquake that
struck Turkey and Syria, the Turkish disaster emergency countermeasures
committee announced that the emergency activities that had continued in the
southern disaster area on the 19th would be completed. The number of deaths that
hit Turkey and Syria exceeded 46,000. The new corona virus has reported 14,239
infections nationwide yesterday. In Tokyo, 992 people were infected. It's going
to be a lot of trouble if we don't increase our immunity. This is the economist
Takuro Morinaga. Hello, Mr. Moitaka. Hello. Thank you for your time. Thank you.
It's been sold for over 150,000 copies, but it's the ABE Heart Recovery Record.
Mr. Abe has been saying that he has fought for the sake of the country. Mr. Abe
had various problems with the Morikake and Sakura parties. However, I think that
what is written here is the truth. I think he is the only politician who has
fought for the sake of the country after the war. In fact, the Ministry of
Finance is written in this article. If you don't follow your own will, you will
go to defeat the government. In other words, the Ministry of Finance is above
the political system chosen by the people. In the ABE Heart Recovery Record, the
first-ever presidential election was held and the people gathered. In the
meantime, the Ministry of Finance decided to take a stand. I think that's what
it says. The staff around me, Mr. Takahashi, who is now a professor at Kaetsu
University, and Mr. Kikuo Iwata, who worked for the Ministry of Finance and the
Ministry of Finance, and Professor Yamada Koichi, who is now a professor at Yale
University, I think that the people of the military were able to fight with each
other. But what I'm saying is that if you pay a tax in the deferred period, the
economy will be in a hurry. If you are a person who is a little bit of an
economist, you will understand. However, in 2019, when the second tax on
consumer goods was not paid, at that time, the Ministry of Finance was in
trouble, and the Ministry of Finance had to take a stand to improve the
financial situation and protect the Prime Minister Abe. I don't think they could
have paid a tax in return for that. I often hear people saying that Abe's mix
was a failure, but I think it would have gone in a good direction if there was
no consumer tax increase tax. What Mr. Ikushima is saying is that Japan's oil
power is mostly on the side of economists. That's right. But that's what the
textbook says. It's a combination of financial and economic produced herkes.
effective. For example, everyone was holding hands. When Mr. Noda was the prime
minister, he said that the first time he was in favor of the consumer tax, he
was in favor of the three-party agreement. Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto was
also in favor of the 3% to 5% consumer tax. After that, he was deceived by the
Ministry of Justice. That was the reason for the deflation. It's easy to be a
pawn, but it's hard to fight. Well, today's issue, the current issue, How about
the new Japanese-Japanese Mr. Ueda said that the clear-cut will continue to be a
financial exchange. It's a clear-cut. I don't know how far the clear-cut will
go. But I've been working on the new investigation, and I've been checking Mr.
Ueda's speech. Mr. Ueda is a financial debt-saving group. So, he'll come to
close one day. In a situation where the economy is not recovering from the
corona virus, I think it's a good idea to continue to be a financial exchange.
That's what I'm talking about. That's right. In that sense, this is also a
matter of the present. Mr. Tsutomu Watanabe of the University of Tokyo
University said that the influx of public funds will stop at the end of the
year. How about this? Mr. Watanabe has been saying that it is necessary to
eliminate the deflamindo to realize the cycle of economic growth and the high
circulation of the economy and the economy. If we create a situation where the
pension increases for that reason, it will be a good thing. But I think it's
strange that the effect of the pension is only on the elderly. If the pension is
not raised, the company will decide, so it will not increase. If we do the same
thing with the tax on half of the consumption tax, I don't know if it's a tax
deduction. I think Mr. Watanabe is a member of the party that draws the tax.
Otherwise, I can't explain it. It's very strange. In the first place, the
pension is raised, but the pension is the amount of insurance for everyone. I
don't know how to increase it. On the other hand, there is a lot of book reviews
in the weekly post. I'm taking up the zero-price theory of Saito Kouhei, an
economist. Can you explain this a little more easily? I've been reading the
commentary book since I was in college. This is an excellent commentary book. I
haven't read the last book, which I was reading in the middle of the commentary.
The most surprising thing is that Marx's most fundamental problem is that the
work becomes boring. The work of manualizing and doing the same simple work only
when it's normal is exponentially increasing. It's exactly like that now. Saito
Kouhei's argument is that we have to change it so that everyone can do more
independently fun work. I think that's right. I've been doing it myself, but if
I have fun, my work gets boring. The zero-price theory is from NHK Publishing
New Book. It's 1,023 yen. I hope you read it. It's a good book. Thank you very
much. Next, we have Yakkun. Yakkun. Good morning. Thank you for having me. We
have a lot of people here every week. Yakkun, please. Good morning. Hello. Good
morning. This is the first time I've seen you. I'm looking forward to meeting
you. Yes, I'm looking forward to meeting you too. I'm looking forward to meeting
you too. I'm looking forward to meeting you too. Thank you. Thank you for having
me. Every week is interesting. I can't help but think of you just by listening
to your image. Really? Thank you very much. Next month is also good. Next month
is also good. My face is a little cloudy. Your face matches the face of the
cast. Well, there are five children. For example, you haven't talked about the
future of your family? No, not at all. You haven't talked about your caretaker,
right? You're still in your 50s. That's right. But my mother and my mother are
getting old. I'll talk about what to do. When you grow up, you'll talk about
your caretaker again. You'll have to think about it in your life. I think so. I
think I have to prepare for various things. But I don't talk about my ancestors.
Are you planning to move to another place in the future? I was able to talk
about it with everyone. As the lifestyle changes, I think it's natural to change
the lifestyle. When my wife and I become two people, I want to have a mansion.
I'm relieved to have a house. I can throw away the garbage whenever I want. Now,
we do everything by ourselves. I think there are many things that I like about a
mansion. Do you sell your house? I sell it. Do you have a lot of memories?
That's right. If I don't think about my memories, I can sell it anytime. But I
can't make memories like that. Did you live in a mansion? I lived in Hawaii. I
think I felt the charm of a mansion. We talked about a good story. This month,
we talked about the future of YAKUMARU HIROHITSU. What is your dream? I want to
maintain the current situation. I want to change my lifestyle every three
months. What do you mean? I want to go to Okinawa, a hot spring, or overseas. I
want to go to a place like that every three months. I've been doing that for the
past 26 years. I couldn't do that. I think I can do that anywhere I go now. I
want to live in various places every three months. It's a dream. You used to
live in Canada, Hawaii, Australia. You went to three places in Japan. I lived in
Chivalry Hills. I still remember the words of Kyosen. I wanted to slow down and
change my life. It's a wonderful expression. There are many things in the world
that you should learn. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. It was fun. Is
it an effective acetic acid that can be used for acetic disease and swelling?
It's a natural herb that makes your mouth feel fresh. I use it once because it's
so delicious. I'm happy that there are noizer and whitening agents in it. I also
use Acet toothbrush that I developed with the dentist. By maintaining
cleanliness in the mouth, you can protect your body from various viruses. Let's
make it clean with Acet and aim for a strong body. We look forward to your
continued support. Hello, this is Hiroshi Ikushima. Good morning. Today, we
talked about the conversation between Yakkun and Kaigo. Tomorrow, Kaigo
consultant Sumiko Nakamura will appear. The social tech corner is the appearance
of Kumiko Kashi. Please enjoy this as well. Thank you for waiting. Next, Danrei
Kyou no Ichi Page. Danrei-san will appear. Dan-san, please join us this week.
Everyone, Yukushima-san, good morning. This is Danrei. Please join us this week
as well. Danrei Kyou no Ichi Page. Would you like to join us? This is the story
of urban farming. Urban farming. This is a farming that is done in urban areas
and in the surrounding areas. To make it a little easier to understand, urban
people are more likely to have a similar farming. Due to the influence of
COVID-19, the number of urban farmers is increasing, which means that they are
starting to make vegetables in the good-access agricultural garden. This is also
one of the urban farming. In the year 2027, the law of the urban farming
progress standard was also adopted, and various projects centered on
agricultural and agricultural products were also carried out. Living in the
city, you can touch the soil, eat freshly picked vegetables, and think that this
alone is enough. As urban farming spreads, you can expect a lot of other
benefits. Now, let me introduce the six functions of urban farming, which the
government has shown. First, the supply of fresh agricultural products. It's
good to have vegetables produced in your own area of life and get them
immediately. Next, the supply of agricultural products. It's good to have
vegetables produced in your own area of life and get them immediately. Next, the
protection of the area from disasters. In the future, there will be more land
that can be used as a shelter. And, and, this may be unnecessary to explain. The
supply of land that brings peace and prosperity. The scenery that spreads green
is relaxing just by looking at it. Also, this is important. The preservation of
the national and environmental conditions. The urban areas covered by asphalt
are worried about the severe environmental disasters of the urban type. The land
is also connected to the prevention of such disasters. And finally, the
understanding of the urban farmers. It is also important for the people of the
land to be interested in agriculture. Urban farming with more than one function.
It is not only about the efforts to protect the agricultural land, but also
about the active efforts to make the land that is not used in the residential
area into a space related to agriculture. Also, it is said that there are many
fun events and projects held by people from various positions such as the
country, the local government, companies, and universities. Please pay attention
to urban farming. Danrei, today's first page. This morning, it was a story of
urban farming that I want to pay attention to now. See you tomorrow. It was
Danrei. ABCD's Ryosuke Hashimoto. Kawaii Fumito. Hiroshima Hiroshi's Ohaio
Ichikusen. It's bright. It's bright. It's getting faster. I wonder if I can get
the number. 9628608. 9628608. The name of the course is JNN. It's a joint
disaster fund. If you look at the homepage of TV STUDIO in detail, it's hard to
get the number wrong. Thank you. Thank you for the many emails. I'm glad to hear
that you're a comedian who sometimes slips. Thank you. I've never had tea
before, but I'm sure you'll like it. Please try it. You can drink it at night.
I'm aware of vegetables and yogurt, but I'm not sure if it's super rich. I don't
drink fresh tea. It's hard to come suddenly. It's an ideal to come to the show
every day, so I'd like to try it. Suizu Daisuki Hiro. Walking is also important.
Exercise is important. Takeda Ishinomaki. Yesterday's Imagoro is Tsurukou and
Takuro Morinaga. Bye bye. Bye bye. I was talking about it all the time. I love
both Moritaka. Thank you for saying that. Thank you for the wonderful message.
Have a nice day. Thank you. Good luck. Kansai Yamato. Sato Seiyaku. Sun Noodle.
Takeout Catering Tatsuo. MediCare Specialist Kobayashi Kiwako. This has been a
presentation by all of our sponsors. After this, we will now play Morimoto
Takero's Stand By. Morimoto Takero's Stand By Morimoto Takero's Stand By
Morimoto Takero's Stand By Morimoto Takero's Stand By Morimoto Takero's Stand By
................................................................................
................................................................................
................................................................................
................................................................................
......................................................................