TRANSCRIPTION: KZOO_AUDIO/2023-02-20-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The total amount of the coronavirus is 1,775 billion yen. This was decided in
the 2023 budget. The hospital for the quarantine of the coronavirus patients
will also be excluded from the list of medical facilities for pregnant women. So
it's going to be a direction of not doing anything, not doing anything, not
doing anything. So the number of deaths related to the coronavirus will
increase, and the response to the death of the coronavirus will increase. So in
reality, there will be people who will die from the coronavirus, and people who
will suffer from the infection. But we have to be prepared that it won't come
out in numbers. And there will be a list of medical facilities. Thank you very
much. The defense ministry has announced that it has launched three times so
far, but in the latest announcement it has launched at least two times.
According to government officials, these two times have either fallen outside of
Japan's EEZ, the Extinguished Economic Water System. Prime Minister Kida,
receiving the missile launch, is giving full attention to information collection
and analysis, and providing rapid and accurate information to the people. It has
also ordered to ensure safety of air and airfields, and to take a perfect
posture in case of a shortage. The launch of the ballistic missile launched by
North Korea will be the third time this year. The Syrian national security media
reported that five people in Damascus, the capital, were killed by Israeli air
strikes. It is possible that the Syrian civil defense organization, which is
active in Syria, has become an target. Israel has decided to support the
disaster that surrounds Syria about 10 days ago. If this air strike is true, it
will be the first attack after the earthquake. The ouf Apple The fact that the
Japanese government has led the Japanese government, is a historical
achievement, and it has been recognized as a result. On the other hand, the
Japanese government has expressed its confidence in the Japanese people, and the
Japanese people's expectations for the Japanese government have increased. I
will now introduce the stand-by talk file, and your email. Today, we will
discuss how Japan's sanctions against Russia are. Do you think this is a good
idea? I have received your opinion on this. There are few people who say yes.
First of all, this is a 59-year-old man from Edo. Japan's sanctions are
insufficient. If you are really worried about Ukraine, I would like to say, be
patient with the crab while you are still in the face. It's not a problem if you
can't eat crabs, and now that the things are overflowing, it's time to be
patient. I think the Japanese government should take serious measures to reduce
the tax on Russia. Next, a man from Tokyo who is in his 50s. The economic
sanctions are meaningless. This is a work of the Yattercan. I am doing an online
conversation, and the teacher in his 20s in Russia said, the economic sanctions
are not a problem. You can make anything in your country. It's what the Russians
say. A man from Tokumei Kibou. I want Japan's sanctions against Russia to be
strengthened more. I sometimes buy because my family likes tarako. It's hard to
find tarako that is not in Russia. I heard that the sanctions against Russia are
also related to the Tartar. I don't want to buy Russian products, but I'm sorry
that the lives of the people in the country are not good. I don't want to sell
them. I forgot to buy the products from Hokkaido. A woman from 38 years old,
Fujimoto, Kawaguchi City, Saitama Prefecture. If the economic sanctions against
Russia are useless, I want you to stop all sanctions and return the goods.
That's my intention. But you can't stop sanctions. Then I want you to stop the
war as soon as possible. But China and India are still trading economically, so
I think Japan's sanctions against Russia are not good. A man from Mitakashi
City, 76 years old. Of course, for the sake of the early period of the war, the
country should immediately look into the sanctions and take measures. First of
all, the export of Chinese goods to Russia for Chinese companies that have been
pointed out before should be stopped immediately. But the companies are not
using them for military purposes. A man from Gunma City, 55 years old. He is a
electronics parts manufacturer. He is very supportive of sanctions, but there is
a question about the effect. I am involved in the supply of metals, tungsten,
gold, cobalt, etc. I think it is difficult to eliminate Russian natural
resources. If Russian goods enter China, the demand will be in a mess. Also, the
world's five-finger material is expensive, so the government and electronics
parts manufacturers are involved, and there is no penalty and the productivity
is not improved. If the government is serious about sanctions, the government
should issue a fine and a penalty. It's hard to get here. So there is a
question. A 44-year-old man from Utsunomiya City, Tochigi Prefecture. I am
reading the Japanese-Korea Autonomous Region Journal of the Japanese Industry.
The number of Chinese companies exported to Russia was the first, and the number
of them was increasing since last year. I see. The number of exports was the
first. Russia is the number one. I feel very doubtful. In Japan, the Chinese-
made car sales companies for domestic products are under strict management
without being able to sell cars to Japanese people. There are no Chinese cars
now. The sweetness of the economic sanctions against Russia is even angry at the
fact that it is causing distortions in the domestic Chinese car market. That's
right. The price of Chinese cars is also increasing. A man from Hachioji City,
Japan, imports natural gas and other natural gas to Russia to export car-related
parts. The economic sanctions are against semiconductor electronics, but
according to the Ministry of Finance, the 2021 target is only 0.1% of the total
export tax against Russia. Even if the economic sanctions are screaming, there
is a limit to the risk of a collapse, and the situation is in a bad state.
Suzuki from Yokohama City. Russia is a production-based country with energy and
food. It is impossible to ban all imports. Japan also exports Chinese cars. All
European countries also import energy, and India and China are originally
opposed to sanctions. As with Japan, Russia has released air goods that are
banned by other countries, and many tourists are happy to be called in. Russia
will not be in pain or in pain. From now on, I think that we should ban the
export of weapons to Russia. A 63-year-old man from Saitama Prefecture. He was
told that he had put a stone in a big road for sanctions against Russia, but
it's a very easy expression. We should stop all exports. However, Russia is a
production-based country, so it will not be painful or painful if Japan makes
sanctions. President Putin should think that it is okay to be a Chinese ally.
And there is a problem with the North Korean government in Japan, so isn't he
laughing at the nose? A 65-year-old man from Suginami-ku. It's impossible to
stop Ukraine from advancing by giving a blow to the economic sanctions on the
Republic of Russia. What would happen if the United States and Russia were only
using weapons while making effective sanctions? I think that the United States
should stop the Ukrainian advance from an artificial point of view. If we don't
talk about each other's military alliance after that, the world will be
destroyed, and I really feel scared. That's all I got from you. A man in his 50s
from Setagaya-ku. Sanctions are made only when the economic power is at their
disposal. Now Japan is not an economic power, so even Russia doesn't have a gun.
It's a sad story. On the other hand, Japan is facing a lot of sanctions. Japan
is not a country that moves the world by sanctions, but a country that is being
turned around by the world. I'm disappointed. I feel the limit of Japan. I'm
getting to hear your opinion. It's a sad story. See you tomorrow. Sun Noodle
Takeout Catering Tatsuo-zu Medicare Specialist Kobayashi Kiwako You're listening
to K-Su, KZOO Honolulu, Hawaii. Thank you. The World's Greatest Show There is no
other way to be saved than by Jesus Christ's blood. Welcome to Intouch, the
teaching of the Bible by Charles Stanley. Radio, TV, satellite broadcasts, and
now, the Bible is being passed on through the Internet. This is something that
never happened before. Even so, there are still many people in the world who
have never heard of the Bible. There are people who can't get the Bible or the
Christian books. There are also people who live in a country where it is
difficult to convey the Bible. So, do these people have a responsibility for the
truth that they have never heard of? Today, by carefully examining the letters
and the clothes of the Romans, Dr. Stanley will solve the question from the old
days. Let's learn more about what happens to people who have never heard of it.
This is Charles Stanley. Most people have probably thought about this question
before. It is a question that people who are against the Bible often bring up.
The question is, what about people who have never heard of the Bible that we
have heard of? How do God see them when they are in judgment? Today, we will
talk about people who have never heard of it. Please open the letter of the
Romans. In order to understand this question, we must understand the way God
sees us. We must separate the truth that God is talking about from our emotions.
We all have emotions that we think that God will not do that. We all have
emotions that we think that God is not the God we know. The important thing is
that the God we know must be the God of the Bible. Let's look at the letter of
the Romans, chapter 18 to 25. This is because God's anger is manifested from
heaven against all the evil deeds and evils of people who are against the Bible.
Therefore, it is clear to them that they know God. God made it clear. The
invisible nature of God, the eternal power and the divine nature of God, is
known by the world since it was created. It is clearly recognized by the world
and they have no room for explanation. Therefore, they know God, but they do not
worship God, nor thank God. When they return, their feelings become empty and
their ignorant mind becomes dark. They say that they are wise, but they become
foolish and change the view of the immortal God to the shape of a human being, a
bird, an animal, or a snake. However, God has attracted them to the lust of
their hearts and they are ashamed of their bodies. This is because they have
changed the truth of God and used the God created in the place of the Creator.
The Creator is the one who is praised by the world. Amen. The word of God is
clear. Those who continue to sin are condemned to a criminal sentence. There is
no room for explanation before the Holy God. Wait a minute. What about those who
have never heard of God? There are those who have never heard of God. What does
God say about such people? The word of God says that there are three ways to
make it clear that God is the only true God. The first two are mentioned in the
first 19 and 20 verses. It is clear to them that they know about God. It was God
who made it clear. The invisible nature of God, the eternal power and the divine
nature of God, is known and clearly recognized by the non-living beings when
they are created in the world. They have no room for explanation. God made it
clear to them in the parents and the non-living beings. So people have no room
for explanation. God showed himself in another way 2000 years ago. It was
through the person named Jesus Christ. John 14, verse 9. Jesus said to him,
Pilipo, for so long have I been with you, but have you not known me? The one who
saw me saw his Father. Why do you say that you should show us your Father? When
you saw me, you saw your Father. God is made clear in three ways today. The
first way God made himself clear is through the parents. It is recorded in any
parents. The second way is through the non-living beings. God is made and
supported by his wisdom and power. There is no other way to explain the
existence of the non-living beings. The third way is through the person named
Jesus Christ and the message of Jesus. God made himself clear in two ways, the
one of the non-living beings. How did people respond to the truth that was made
clear? God says that people have responsibilities. God does not give judgment to
go to hell because he refused to believe in the unheard of. God's judgment is
based on the sins of people. No matter who you are, no matter where you live in
your life, people cannot repent of their sins. Some people may ask, Can people
be saved even if they do not believe in Jesus Christ? No, they cannot be saved
without believing in the cross of the Lord. You have to see the truth, not be
emotional or emotional. You have a good personality and you may be kind to
people. But you cannot solve your sin by being kind. We are separated from God
and we are in this world as a desolate existence. We have two options. We can go
to God with our sins. Either we accept Jesus Christ as dead for our sins and go
to God. If we accept Jesus Christ as our Savior, at that moment, the power of
the resurrection and death of the dead will be worked on in our lives. We will
be forgiven from our sins and be freed from their power. We will be saved
forever. Is there a way to be saved except by believing in Jesus Christ? No,
there is not. Please see John 3, 15, 16. It is for all who believe to meet with
the Son of Man and have eternal life. God was loved enough to give you that one.
It is for all who believe to meet with the Son of Man and have eternal life.
Please see John 3, 16. It is for all who believe to meet with the Son of Man and
have eternal life. It is for all who do not obey to the Son of Man and do not
see life. The anger of God will remain on them. For those who seek the truth,
God will deliver the truth in the presence of God. Many of the Bible's words
clearly say that the cross of Jesus is the salvation. Paul says in Romans 10,
13, For those who seek the Lord's name will be saved by all. In Romans 9, For if
you believe that God has brought Jesus back from the dead by confessing Jesus to
the Lord in your mouth, you will be saved. The Bible says that there is no
salvation except for the cross of Jesus, for the sin of all people, and the
death of Jesus Christ. It may be said that it is a very narrow way of thinking.
But please listen. God will deliver the truth to those who seek the truth. Let's
look at the work of the Apostles and the actual chapter. I will tell you a
little about this background. There was a man named Cornelius, who was a 100-man
captain of the Romans and sought the Lord. He was trying to say the right thing
in the range he could understand. One day, God spoke to him and asked him to
invite Peter. God spoke to Peter at the same time. At this point, Peter had a
prejudice against the Pharisees. So he argued with God about whether he should
speak to the Pharisees. He was a Jew, so he didn't think about speaking to the
Pharisees. But God said to him, Do so. Then the people who were sent by
Cornelius told Peter that Cornelius would come to him by the sign from God. He
went to see Cornelius. Let's look at the work of the Apostles and the actual
chapter, verses 30 to 38. Cornelius said, How about I pray at home at three
o'clock in the morning? The man in the bright robe stood in front of me and
said, Cornelius, your prayers have been heard and your prayer has been
remembered before God. So, invite people to the temple and invite Simon. His
name is also called Peter. This man is staying at Simon's house in the river
Nameshi in the Umba. So I sent someone to you right away, but you came well. Now
we are all in front of God trying to hear everything that the Lord has been
told. Peter answered as follows, verses 34. Then Peter opened his mouth and
said, Now I understand clearly. God does not do anything that is dependent on
God, and if anyone in any country does God's fear, understanding, and
righteousness, he will be accepted by God. God was sent to Israel by Jesus
Christ to spread peace. This Jesus Christ is the Lord of all people. You know
that after the baptism of John, he started from the Galilee and went to the
Garden of Eden. That is Jesus of Nazareth. God gave him spirit and power. This
Jesus was with God, so he walked around and did all the good things, and healed
all the demons. Then Peter spoke the message. It's verse 44 and 45. When Peter
was still talking about these words, the spirit was sent down to all the people
who were listening to the word of God. The believers who were being baptized
came with Peter, and the Christians were also surprised to see the spirit of
God. When Peter spoke the gospel, they believed. Col. Nereo was a modest man,
and he was trying to do the right thing, so God taught him the perfect truth.
Please watch the verse 34 and 35 again. Then Peter opened his mouth and said, I
have now understood that God does not do the right thing. If you are a person of
any country, and you are a person who fears and understands God and does
justice, you will be accepted by God. There are people who live with fear of God
wherever they are in this world. You may not know what kind of person God is,
but you are a person who wishes to follow the truth that God has taught you.
When you try to live according to the truth that God has taught you, what kind
of person do you think will happen? God will deliver you with more light and
truth. If you really want to know the truth, please take the responsibility of
God delivering the truth. I would like you to think about this in your head and
listen to some of the words of the Bible. First, please watch the verse 33 and
11. I will say to them, I will say to them, O you, the servant of God, I will
never be pleased with the death of the wicked. When you return, the wicked will
eat your food and live again. Eat and return from the path of evil. In the three
verses, 17, Jesus said, God has been used by the world not to judge the world,
but to be saved by the world. God does not wish to decide on anyone's sin. God
is the God of love. But God is also the God of justice and justice. God wishes
that all people know the truth. When people close their hearts to the truth, and
do not try to bring together the saints, the church, and the gospel, God does
not try to have anything to do with them. They are brought into the wrong
thoughts, and they are lost in front of God. Now, let's see what Jesus said
about the people and their reaction when he heard the truth. Matthew 10, verse
1. Jesus called the twelve disciples and gave them the right to be saved. They
were to be saved from all kinds of sickness and suffering. Then Jesus was
commanded, from verse 11 to verse 15. No matter what town or village you enter,
you must search for a suitable place to stay until you reach the right place.
When you enter the house, say hello to the house. If the house is the right one
for you, the peace will come to the house. If it is not the right house, the
peace will return to you. If no one can listen to you, if no one can listen to
your words, when you leave the house or the town, you must pay for your loss. I
will tell you the truth. On the day of judgment, even in Sodom and Gomorrah, the
punishment is still lighter than the town. Sodom and Gomorrah are the most evil,
immoral, and immoral places in the Bible. They are the worst of all. But what
does Jesus say? On the day of judgment, the town will reject the gospel you
preach, the town will reject the truth you speak of, and the punishment of Sodom
and Gomorrah will be lighter. Please remember this. The judgment of God is the
right one. God is always right, and he does not make mistakes. People are judged
based on three things. This is clear from this verse. People are judged based on
the light they receive. How much light did Sodom and Gomorrah receive compared
to Jerusalem and other places where Jesus had a miracle? Please look at what
Jesus said in verse 15. I will tell you the truth. On the day of judgment, the
town will reject the gospel you preach, the town will reject the truth you speak
of, and the punishment of Sodom and Gomorrah will be lighter. The second is how
much opportunity there was. The third is how we used that opportunity. Please
remember that God is a holy one. And a holy God and a sinful person are not to
be loved. The cross is the bridge that God was given in order for a sinful
person to return to the holy God. 私がどれほどひどい罪を犯したか あなたは知らないからですと言われるかもしれません。
けれどもそれは問題ではありません。 イエスがヨハネの福音章3章16説で言われたことをもう一度聞いてください。 神は実にその一人ごをお与えになったほどに
よう愛された。 それは、御子を信じる者が一人として滅びることなく 永遠の命を持つためである。 このイエスを信じるのです。
もう一度ローマ人の手紙、10章13説を見てみましょう。 主の皆を呼び求める者は誰でも救われる。そう書いてあります。
ですから、主の皆を呼び求め、罪の許しを求め、真実な神はお一人であり、 イエス・キリストは神の一人ごだと受け入れるとき。
そして、自分は神に対して罪を犯し、本当は地獄がふさわしいものだったと認め、 神の恵みと哀みと愛を求めるとき、 神は決してあなたを知り遂げられることはないのです。
イエスは、ヨハネの福音書6章37説で、 父が私にお与えになる者は皆、私のところに来ます。 そして、私のところに来る者を私は決して捨てませんと言っています。
これは、イエスが神の御子であるということを、そのまま単純に信頼する全ての人、神の御子のもとへ招いている言葉です。
これは、御子を通して永遠の命を与えてくださる、神の無条件の愛です。 イエスの福音書 多くの心理を聞かされている者には、それだけ多くの責任があります。
Charles Stanleyが福音をはっきりと伝えました。 聖なる神の前で言い訳はできません。
今日、キリストをあなたの救い主として信じる決心をし、あなたを愛し、あなたの必要を全て満たすことを願われている神を知る歩みを始めてください。
神への情熱と人々への愛で世界に触れる、チャールズ・スタンレイの教えを、インタッチミニストリーズがお送りしています。 イエスの福音書 J-SHOP
新鮮な魚やとろける和牛、日本の食品や雑貨、出来立ての温かいお弁当まで、味と質にこだわる J-SHOP お客様のお声を大切にしています。 場所は1513
Young Street。 営業時間は月曜日から土曜日、10時から6時、日曜日は定給です。 J-SHOP で毎日の食卓を豊かに。
サンヌードルの営業担当のヒロです。今回ご紹介するのは夏といえばこれ。 冷し中華。リンゴとビネガーのタレがさっぱり。ツルツルの麺とぴったり。美味しい。
暑い日はこれで決まりです。 東京ホテー丸海2時夜で大好評発売中。 時刻は2時40分になりました。ここから今日4時まで私DJカリフォルニアロールが担当します。
私の音楽の選曲をお楽しみください。最初の一曲はミヒマル・ジーティー 映画な。 私の音楽の選曲をお楽しみください。 レディーゴー! レディーゴー!
馬鹿じゃないの? え?なんで? ニーちゃんもネーちゃんも ニートもエリートも 大きい夢いざ行ってやれ 生ける喜び感じたらエガな 明日に向かって走れ
DJ化したビーツの波のり タイトに入らせ もう一度まだまだいけんじゃない 好きな子見てるよ I love you 大好きな映画見て ポップコン口に頬張るの
想像する主人公に 今日もなりきるわ あの子代でも どんな社会でも 大きい夢いざ行ってやれ 人生は一度 楽しんだらエガな 明日に向かって走れ 何でか泣いても
生まれたからには 凄く強い夢いざ行ってやれ 今この時を 楽しんだらエガな 明日も笑顔で走れ でも今日は とりあえず 寝よう 街を見下ろす丘から
あの日僕らは何を見てた やっと二人きりになれた 照れながらあの日 明日の朝早く僕は 上りの電車に乗るんだね 卒業の後の校舎 小さく見つけた 行かないでと
人を言うつぶやいた君 あの時 僕は見えない 夢を抱いていた 離れていても きっといつまでも 君のことを想っているよと 言った心が 今更 零いて 黙らないよ
君にさよなら 電話で告げた 過ぎてゆく季節の中に 会えない時間にも 距離に負けない 僕らがいた 僕のコートの裏には 君のセーターの色が残り ケースの時の香りが
消えずにある どこか大人びて見えた あれは 口紅のせいだって 今なら様々に 思い当たることもあるが 片道のギップを 裂けたふりで 取り上げ 君は無理して
妙にはしゃいでいた 離れたらもう ダメになるよと 君がうつむくの打ち消して 僕はコートで 震えるその肩 包み込んだ こんなに笑顔 思い出すのに
そこで途切れてしまう君 忘れてしまっても 忘れはしないよ 胸のどこかが 聞かないでと 人をとっと 呟いた君 あの時 僕は見えない 夢を抱いていた 君にさよなら
電話でつけた 過ぎてゆく季節の中に 会えない時間にも 距離にも 浮かべない 僕らがいた 場所を見下ろす 丘からあの日 君が見せいた何かを この頃 無理に
わかった気がすることもあるよ 君に出逢った 君に恋した この体の傷と 人を見つめていた 景色がいつでも 描かれている 運命なんて知らない 運命なんて知らないけど
この際 存在を認めざるを得ない 本当にこんな私 でもいいのねえいいの あんまり期待させないでほしいよ 今日という日は 嘘偽りのない 永遠の誓い いいよりだよ
綺麗な花も 承認もいられない 同じ色の指をしよう 悔しくて仕方がない 鮮いくらい 違いについたまま 眠りたい 毎日 約束はもうしない そんなの
誰かを喜ばすためのもの 今言うことは 受け売りなんかじゃない 約束でもない 誓いだよ 嘘つきだった 僕には戻らない 優しい色の指をしよう 胸の高鳴りを
重ねて踊ろうよ 今を生きることを祝おうよ たまにこらえられなくなる涙に これと言って深い意味はない ただ昔を突然思い出し 嗚呼 泣きたい
開かれたドアから差し込む光 これからもずっとそばにいたい 選択肢なんても遠くにない 今日という日は 過去先例のない 僕たちの誓い ピアリーだよ 綺麗な花も
承認もいらない 同じ色の指をしよう Kiss me once, kiss me twice 一度じゃ足りない Kiss me once, kiss me
twice あなたをください Kiss me once, kiss me twice キスするよ 三度で Kiss me once, kiss me twice
あなたをください 火の昇る音を肩並べて聴こうよ 共に生きることを祝おうよ もう一曲 アニメソードアートオンラインの主題歌 春菜ルナでスターティア もっと強く
そう強く なりたいと願った 悲しみを越えて 変わることない過去に なんとも背を向けてた 誰にも見せられない 傷を隠したままずっと 溢れ出したこの痛みは
全て一人で抱きしめる いつか消える温もりなら 一つもいらないよ もっと強く そう強く なりたいと願った 暗闇を駆ける 孤独な星のように 心深く沈めた
弱くて脆い自分 言葉にできなくて 声にも鳴らなくて きっと誰にも見つからないように ただ光を待ってる 君に触れた日から 広がる景色の中 ソウト伸ばす腕で
確かめるように抱きしめた 温かな君の瞳は この胸をかすかに揺らす あの日失くした感情が熱を帯びてゆく はるか遠く ちょっと遠く 願いを届けたい 胸にこみ上げた
炎に誓うように 心深く沈めた 想いがいつの日か 明日も変えられる 光になるように いつまでもこの場所で私は輝く 未来を待ってる 強い風に笑い合った あの記憶が
この胸を叩くように 勇気をくれる 前を向く痛み 隠した傷だって 強さに変わってゆく 私はもう何も怖く 狂わないから もうもっと強く そう強く なりたいと願った
暗闇を照らす 煌めく星のように 涙の中 見つめた 君を守る誓い 悲しみを超えて 辿り着く日まで 始まりに高鳴るこの鼓動を ずっと信じ続ける 午後3時です